---
title: Motor Representation in Acting Together
authors: Corrado Sinigaglia and Stephen A. Butterfill
type: Publication
collection: writing
slug: writing/sinigaglia2022_motor
url: /writing/sinigaglia2022_motor/
summary: <div class='fulltext'> <h1 id="sec:abstract">Abstract</h1> <div
  class='abstract'> People walk, build, paint and otherwise act together with a
  purpose in myriad ways. What is the relation between the actions people
  perform in acting together with a purpose and the outcome, or outcomes, to
  which their actions are directed?
year: 2022
source: src/content/writing/sinigaglia2022_motor.md
---

<div class='fulltext'>

<h1 id="sec:abstract">Abstract</h1>

<div class='abstract'>
People walk, build, paint and otherwise act together with a purpose in myriad ways. What is the relation between the actions people perform in acting together with a purpose and the outcome, or outcomes, to which their actions are directed? We argue that fully characterising this relation will require appeal not only to intention, knowledge and other familiar philosophical paraphernalia but also to another kind of representation involved in preparing and executing actions, namely motor representation. If we are right, motor representation plays a central role in the story of acting together.
</div>

<h1 id="sec:new_introduction">A Question about Acting Together</h1>
<p>People walk, build, paint and otherwise act together with a purpose
in myriad ways. Minimally, our acting together with a purpose requires
that there be some sense in which we are acting together, and also an
outcome to which our actions are directed. But this is not quite enough
to capture what we want. To see why not, consider a contrast involving a
long drain which is blocked:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>CASE 1: Ayesha and Beatrice live at different ends of the drain. By
chance, they are simultaneously attempting to unblock it with drain
rods. Although neither’s efforts would have been sufficient, the common
effect of their actions is sufficient vibration and disturbance to clear
the blockage.</p>
<p>CASE 2: … is exactly like CASE 1 except that it is not by chance but
by agreement that Ayesha and Beatrice are simultaneously attempting to
unblock the drain; moreover, they expect that blockage to be removed as
a common effect of their actions.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>In both cases we can say that Ayesha and Beatrice unblocked the drain
together—after all, neither of them alone was doing quite enough to move
the blockage.<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> Further, there is a single outcome,
the unblocking, to which each of their actions are directed. Yet we aim
to exclude the first case and include the second only. This can be done
by imposing a further requirement: where we act together with a purpose,
there must be an outcome to which our actions are directed and this
cannot be, or cannot only be, a matter of each action being directed to
it. To save words, we stipulate that in such cases our actions are
<em>collectively directed</em> to the outcome.</p>
<p>These minimal requirements on acting together with a purpose are
weaker than those commonly assumed in discussions of acting together for
they involve neither psychological mechanisms such as shared intentions
(contrast <span class="citation" data-cites="Bratman:1992mi">(Bratman
1992)</span>) nor normative structures (contrast <span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert:2014_book">(Gilbert 2013)</span>); nor do they
invoke any novel kind of reasoning (<span class="citation"
data-cites="Gold:2007zd">(Gold and Sugden 2007)</span>) or subject
(<span class="citation" data-cites="helm_plural_2008">(Helm
2008)</span>). <a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> Despite this, there is at least one
question which can be brought into view without relying on anything more
than the minimal requirements.</p>
<p>To see this question, recall the contrast above. Given that actions
are events, there is no special mystery about how the actions we perform
can collectively have effects such as unblocking a drain: this is just a
matter of events having common effects. By contrast, it is less obvious
how our actions could be directed to unblocking the drain without this
being merely a matter of each action being individually directed to that
outcome. When we act together with a purpose, in virtue of what are the
actions we perform collectively directed to outcomes?</p>
<p>This question is parallel to one about ordinary individual actions
and the outcomes to which they are directed. Some have argued that the
directedness of ordinary, individual actions to outcomes depends not
only on intention or knowledge or other familiar philosophical
paraphernalia but also other kinds of representations which are involved
in preparing and executing actions; in particular, something called
<em>motor representations</em> (see section <a href="#sec:acting_alone"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:acting_alone">2</a>).
Inspired by these arguments, and taking the correctness of their
conclusion as a premise, we shall consider whether they can be
generalised to acting together with a purpose. This will involve four
steps. The first step is to examine the possibility that, when people
act together with a purpose, the outcomes to which their actions are
collectively directed are sometimes represented motorically. Recent
discoveries suggest that this is indeed the case (see section <a
href="#sec:collective_goals_are_represented" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_goals_are_represented">3</a>). The second
step is to propose a conjecture: motor representations of outcomes can
be components of certain interagential structures, and these structures
can facilitate interpersonal coordination of actions around the
represented outcomes (see section <a href="#sec:coordination"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:coordination">4</a> where
we first specify the interagential structure). The third step is to show
that the conjecture is theoretically coherent and empirically motivated
(see section <a href="#sec:two_objections" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:two_objections">5</a>). The fourth step is to
observe that the conjecture implies an answer to our overall question:
Sometimes when people act together with a purpose, it is a certain
interagential structure of motor representations in virtue of which
their actions are collective directed to outcomes (see section <a
href="#sec:collective_goals_motor_representations"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_goals_motor_representations">6</a>).</p>
<p>Our focus may seem unusual. There are rich discussions of commitment
<span class="citation"
data-cites="Roth:2004ki gilbert:2014_book michael:2022_book">(Roth 2004;
Gilbert 2013; Michael 2022)</span>, of shared intention <span
class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book Searle:1990em ludwig:2016_individual">(Bratman
2014; Searle 1990; Ludwig 2016)</span>, of knowledge <span
class="citation"
data-cites="blomberg:2015_common rodl:2018_joint roessler:2020_plural satne:2020_practical">(Blomberg
2016; Rödl 2018; Roessler 2024; Satne 2020)</span>, of norms <span
class="citation" data-cites="bicchieri:2016_norms">(Bicchieri
2016)</span>, of awareness <span class="citation"
data-cites="Schmid:2013_self">(Schmid 2013)</span>, of temporal
coordination <span class="citation"
data-cites="issartel:2007_unintended oullier:2008_social">(Issartel,
Marin, and Cadopi 2007; Oullier et al. 2008)</span>, of reasoning <span
class="citation"
data-cites="Gold:2007zd Sugden:2000mw pacherie:2013_lite">(Gold and
Sugden 2007; Sugden 2000; Pacherie 2013)</span>, and of agents <span
class="citation" data-cites="helm_plural_2008">(Helm 2008)</span>. By
contrast, despite a groundbreaking proposal <span class="citation"
data-cites="Pacherie:2006dl">(Pacherie and Dokic 2006)</span>, motor
representation has been widely ignored in philosophical discussions in
this area. This may be because philosophers assume motor representations
play at most an enabling role by coordinating actions. Our aim is to
identify a more central role for them in the story of acting
together.</p>
<h1 id="sec:acting_alone">Motor Representation in Acting Alone with a
Purpose</h1>
<p>The aim of this paper is to argue that when acting together with a
purpose, the actions performed are sometimes collectively directed to an
outcome in virtue of a certain structure of motor representations. As a
starting point, let us outline, in barest detail, an established view
about motor representation in acting alone with a purpose. We shall
later argue that this view can be generalised to acting together.</p>
<p>Consider very small scale actions, such as playing a chord, dipping a
brush into a can of paint, placing a book on a shelf or cracking an egg.
<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> Often enough, the early part of such
an action carries information about how the action will unfold. For
example, in grasping a book (or tall cylinder) you would probably hold
its middle, which makes lifting it less effortful. But if you are about
to place the book on a high shelf, you are more likely to grasp the book
at one end, which makes lifting it more awkward now but will later make
placing it easier <span class="citation"
data-cites="cohen:2004_wherea meyer:2013_higher-order">(Cohen and
Rosenbaum 2004; Meyer, Wel, and Hunnius 2013)</span>. For another
illustration, imagine you are a cook who needs to take an egg from its
box, crack it and put it (except for the shell) into a bowl ready for
beating into a carbonara sauce. How tightly you now need to grip the egg
depends, among other things, on the forces to which you will later
subject the egg in lifting it. It turns out that people reliably grip
objects such as eggs just tightly enough across a range of conditions in
which the optimal tightness of grip varies. How tightly you initially
grip the egg indicates your anticipated future hand and arm movements
(compare <span class="citation"
data-cites="kawato:1999_internal">Kawato 1999</span>).</p>
<p>This anticipatory control of grasp, like several other features of
action performance (<span class="citation"
data-cites="rosenbaum:2010_human">(see Rosenbaum 2009, chap. 1)</span>
for more examples), is not plausibly a consequence of mindless
physiology. It indicates that control of action involves representations
concerning how actions will unfold in the future. These and other
representations which characteristically play a role in coordinating
very small scale actions are labelled ‘motor representations’. <a
href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a></p>
<p>What do motor representations represent? An initially tempting view
would be that they represent sequences of bodily configurations and
joint displacements only. However there is a significant body of
evidence for the opposing view that some motor representations represent
outcomes to which purposive actions are directed, such as the placing of
a book or the breaking of an egg. These are outcomes which might, on
different occasions, involve very different bodily configurations and
joint displacements (see <span class="citation"
data-cites="rizzolatti_functional_2010">(Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia
2010)</span> for a selective review). The experiments providing such
evidence typically involve a marker—such as a pattern of neuronal
firings, a motor evoked potential or a behavioural performance
profile—which allows sameness or difference of motor representation to
be distinguished. Such markers can be exploited to show that the
sameness and difference of motor representations is linked to the
sameness and difference of outcomes such as the grasping of a particular
object. This supports the view that some motor representations represent
outcomes other than sequences of bodily configurations and joint
displacements. <a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
<p>If some motor representations do indeed represent such outcomes, why
consider them to be motoric at all? Part of the answer concerns their
role in preparing and performing actions. <a href="#fn6"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6" role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a>
Motor representations can trigger processes which are like planning in
some respects. These processes are planning-like in that they involve
starting with representations of relatively distal outcomes and
gradually filling in details, resulting in motor representations whose
contents can be hierarchically arranged by the means–end relation <span
class="citation" data-cites="grafton:2007_evidence">(Grafton and
Hamilton 2007)</span>. Some processes triggered by motor representations
are also planning-like in that they involve meeting constraints on the
selection of means by which to bring about one outcome that arise from
the need to select means by which, later, to bring about another outcome
<span class="citation" data-cites="rosenbaum:2012_cognition">(Rosenbaum
et al. 2012)</span>. So motor processes are planning-like both in that
they involve computation of means–ends relations and in that they
involve satisfying relational constraints on the selection of means.</p>
<p>Motor representations can be distinguished from intentions.
Future-directed intentions set problems for practical reasoning and are
subject to norms such as agglomeration. (In short, the norm of
agglomeration says it is a mistake to knowingly have several intentions
if it would be a mistake to knowingly have one large intention
agglomerating the several intentions; see <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1987xw">(Bratman 1987)</span>). While there may be
kinds of intention which are unlike future-directed intentions,
intentions of any kind are inferentially and normatively integrated with
future-directed intentions (compare <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1984jr">(Bratman 1984, 379)</span>; <span
class="citation" data-cites="pacherie:2000_content">(Pacherie 2000,
403)</span>). By contrast, motor representations are inferentially and
normatively isolated from future-directed intentions. To illustrate,
consider again the cook who is reaching for an egg to grasp and
transport it. Her actions are subject to two kinds of constraint. One
kind is associated with motor processes and representations, and is
manifest in things such as the end-state comfort effect (which concerns
avoiding extreme joint angles; <span class="citation"
data-cites="rosenbaum:2012_cognition">(Rosenbaum et al. 2012,
926)</span>) and Fitt’s law (which links speed and accuracy). Another
kind of constraint arises from her intentions and beliefs, which in this
case mean she needs to break the egg into the sauce and not the
similar-sized, conveniently positioned fruit bowl. If motor
representations and intentions were inferentially integrated, we would
expect a single process of practical reasoning to enable agents to meet
both kinds of constraint. But in fact practical reasoning rarely if ever
enables agents to meet constraints associated with motor processes and
representations <span class="citation"
data-cites="Searle:1983tx">(compare Searle 1983, 151)</span>. This
suggests that motor representations are interestingly distinct from
intentions, at least as intentions are standardly conceived. <a
href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a></p>
<p>These reflections indicate that actions are sometimes directed to an
outcome in virtue of motor representations. For we have just seen that,
when you break an egg (for example), there may be a motor representation
in you of this outcome, the breaking of the egg, and that this motor
representation can trigger planning-like processes which coordinate your
actions and do so in such a way that, normally, such coordination would
facilitate the occurrence of the outcome represented. This ensures that
your actions are directed to the breaking of the egg. Motor
representations and processes are therefore sufficient for actions to be
directed to outcomes. <a href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a></p>
<p>To summarise, motor representations characteristically play a role in
the coordination of very small scale actions. Some represent outcomes
such as the placing of a book or the breaking of an egg. They trigger
planning-like processes which ensure that sequences of very small scale
actions are coordinated around the outcomes represented motorically. And
despite resembling intentions in some ways, motor representations and
the processes in which they feature are distinct from intentions and
practical reasoning. All of this indicates that in some cases where
someone acts alone with a purpose, it is motor representations that link
her actions to outcomes. In what follows we aim to generalise this claim
to acting together with a purpose.</p>
<h1 id="sec:collective_goals_are_represented">Motor Representation in
Acting Together with a Purpose</h1>
<p>The first step is to examine the possibility that when people act
together with a purpose, outcomes to which their actions are
collectively directed are sometimes represented motorically. A variety
of findings jointly indicate that this is indeed the case.</p>
<p>Using simultaneous EEG measurements from a pair of interacting agents
performing complementary actions, <span class="citation"
data-cites="Menoret:2013fk">Ménoret et al. (2014)</span> provided
evidence that motor representations in one agent may be affected by
facts about another’s actions or the outcomes to which they are
directed, even when these have no significant effect on the kinematics
of the agent’s own actions. While this doesn’t quite show that an
outcome to which both agents’ actions are directed is represented
motorically (as <span class="citation"
data-cites="Menoret:2013fk">Ménoret et al. (2014)</span> themselves note
on p. 95), the finding does indicate that some or other aspects of
another’s actions can be represented motorically when interacting with
them.</p>
<p>To take a step further, consider pianists who produce a chord in
playing a duet. There is evidence that, sometimes, in a pianist playing
a duet, monitoring and control of action involves representations not
only of the pianist’s and her partner’s individual contributions but
also of the chord that she and her partner are supposed to produce
together <span class="citation"
data-cites="loehr:2013_monitoring">(Janeen D. Loehr et al. 2013)</span>.
This indicates that, in some cases, where some agents’ actions are
collectively directed to an outcome, this outcome is represented
motorically.</p>
<p>Further evidence for this view comes from a study exploiting the fact
that imitation facilitates motor responses <span class="citation"
data-cites="tsai:2011_groop_effect">(Tsai, Sebanz, and Knoblich
2011)</span>. Subjects were required to imitate single key-presses
performed by a counterpart. Each subject sat next to a confederate who
also had a counterpart and who, on critical trials, either imitated her
counterpart or, in another condition, performed an action complementary
to her counterpart’s. The experimenters asked whether subjects
represented motorically only the outcomes to which their own actions
were individually directed, or whether they also represented motorically
outcomes to which their actions and those of the confederate were, or
could have been, collectively directed. Where the former occurs, facts
about the confederate’s task should not directly affect the subjects’
actions: imitation should facilitate performance in every case. By
contrast, where the latter occurs, subjects will only be imitating in
conditions in which the confederate’s task is to do what her counterpart
does. So performance should vary systematically depending on which
outcomes the subject’s and confederate’s actions could be collectively
directed to. And this is what the findings revealed <span
class="citation" data-cites="ramenzoni:2014_scaling">(related evidence
is provided by Ramenzoni, Sebanz, and Knoblich 2014)</span>.</p>
<p>While any of these studies can be interpreted in various ways, taken
together they provide at least enough evidence to justify treating as a
working hypothesis the view that there are motor representations of
outcomes to which the actions people perform in acting together with a
purpose could be collectively directed. <a href="#fn9"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a> But
taking this hypothesis seriously invites a question. What are those
motor representations doing there?</p>
<h1 id="sec:coordination">Coordination in Acting Together: A
Conjecture</h1>
<p>We conjecture that motor representations of outcomes to which actions
are collectively directed can enable interpersonal coordination. More
specifically, we conjecture that there are certain interagential
structures (specified below) which include these motor representations
and that, where some actions are collectively directed to these
outcomes, the structures can facilitate interpersonal coordination of
the actions around the outcomes. <a href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref10" role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a> The next step in our
overall argument is to explain how this conjecture could be true.</p>
<p>Consider what is involved when, in acting alone, you move a mug from
one place to another, passing it between your hands half-way. In this
action there is a need to coordinate the exchange between your two
hands. If your action is fluid, you may proactively prepare to release
the mug from your left hand moments in advance of the mug’s being
secured by your right hand <span class="citation"
data-cites="diedrichsen:2003_anticipatory">(compare Diedrichsen et al.
2003)</span>. How is such tight coordination achieved? A full answer
cannot be given by appeal to physiology alone <span class="citation"
data-cites="jackson:2002_functional piedimonte:2015_invisible">(Jackson,
German, and Peacock 2002; Piedimonte et al. 2015)</span>. Instead, part
of the answer involves the fact that there is a motor representation for
the whole action which triggers planning-like motor processes, so that
the motor representations and processes concerning the actions involving
each hand are not entirely independent of each other (compare <span
class="citation" data-cites="kelso:1979_coordination">(Kelso, Southard,
and Goodman 1979)</span> and <span class="citation"
data-cites="rosenbaum:2010_human">(Rosenbaum 2009, 244–48)</span>). As
we have seen (in section <a href="#sec:acting_alone"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:acting_alone">2</a>), such
planning-like processes result in motor representations concerning
different parts of the action which can be hierarchically arranged by
the means-ends relation and ensure that relational constraints on
components of the action are satisfied. So when you move a mug from one
place to another, passing it between your hands half-way, and when this
action and its components are represented motorically in a plan-like
hierarchy, it is this plan-like hierarchy which ensures the movements of
one hand constrain and are constrained by the movements of the other
hand.</p>
<p>Compare this individual action with a similar moving of the mug
performed by two agents acting together. One agent takes the mug and
passes it to the other, who then places it. This event is like the
individual action in two respects. There is a similar coordination
problem—the agents’ two hands have to meet; and the outcome to which
their actions are collectively directed is the same, namely to move the
mug from here to there. Our working hypothesis is that, sometimes, when
acting together, this outcome, the movement of the mug from one place to
another, is represented in each agent motorically. Such motor
representations can trigger planning-like processes, so that in each
agent there will be motor representations somewhat like those that would
occur were she performing the whole action alone (compare <span
class="citation"
data-cites="kourtis:2012_predictive kourtis:2014_attention meyer:2011_joint meyer:2013_higher-order">(Kourtis,
Sebanz, and Knoblich 2013; Kourtis et al. 2014; Meyer et al. 2011;
Meyer, Wel, and Hunnius 2013)</span>).</p>
<p>But why should this support, rather than hinder, coordination?
Suppose that the agents’ planning-like motor processes are sufficiently
similar that, in this context at least, they will nonaccidentally
produce matching plan-like hierarchies of motor representations in each
agent. For a plan-like hierarchy in an agent, let the <em>self part</em>
be those motor representations concerning the agent’s own actions and
let the <em>other part</em> be the other motor representations. <a
href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a> Then, just as in the case where one
agent moves the mug all by herself, the self part of each agent’s
plan-like hierarchy (grasping and giving the mug with the left hand,
say) will be directly constrained by the other part of her plan-like
hierarchy (taking and placing the mug with the right hand, say). But
matching implies that the other part of her plan-like hierarchy matches
the self part of the other’s plan-like hierarchy. This ensures that the
self part of her plan-like hierarchy will be indirectly constrained by
the self part of the other agent’s plan-like hierarchy. Thus, much as
motor representations of outcomes can enable intrapersonal coordination
in acting alone, so also can matching structures of motor
representations enable interpersonal coordination when acting together.
Or so we conjecture.</p>
<p>The case just offered for this conjecture relies on an as yet
unspecified notion of <em>matching</em>. In the simplest case, plan-like
hierarchies of motor representations match if they are identical. But
matching does not require identity. It is sufficient that the
differences between two (or more) plan-like hierarchies of motor
representations don’t matter in the following sense. First consider what
would happen if, for a particular agent, the other part of her plan-like
hierarchy were as nearly identical to the self part (or parts) of the
other’s plan-like hierarchy (or others’ plan-like hierarchies) as
psychologically possible. Would the agent’s self part be different? If
not, let us say that any differences between her plan-like hierarchy and
the other’s (or others’) are <em>not relevant</em> for her. Finally, if
for some agents’ plan-like hierarchies of motor representations the
differences between them are not relevant for any of the agents, then
let us say that the differences <em>don’t matter</em>. Consider the
condition that the differences between plan-like hierarchies of motor
representations in two agents don’t matter. Meeting this condition is
sufficient to support our proposed explanation of how motor
representations could enable interpersonal coordination. So even without
fully specifying how plan-like hierarchies in two (or more) agents must
be related if motor representations are to explain interpersonal
coordination, we can be sure that there are sufficient conditions for
such matching.</p>
<p>We can now describe an interagential structure of motor
representations capable of facilitating interpersonal coordination. This
involves four conditions. First, there must be an outcome to which the
actions are, or could be, collectively directed, and in each agent there
must be a motor representation of this outcome. Second, these motor
representations must trigger planning-like processes which result in
plan-like hierarchies of motor representations in each agent. Third, the
plan-like hierarchy in each agent must involve motor representations
concerning not only actions she will eventually perform but also actions
another will eventually perform. Fourth, the plan-like hierarchies of
motor representations in the agents must non-accidentally match. When
all four conditions are met, the result is an interagential structure of
motor representations.</p>
<p>As we have just seen, instances of this interagential structure could
coordinate actions performed by people acting together with a purpose in
something like the way that ordinary, individual hierarchies of motor
representations can coordinate actions performed by a person acting
alone with a purpose.</p>
<p>It is no part of our view that the need for interpersonal
coordination can always be met by this interagential structure of motor
representations. People acting together with a purpose may successfully
coordinate their actions around outcomes which are not represented
motorically. Suppose that Hannah puts slugs in Sara’s shoes and Lucas
puts worms in her hat, where their actions are collectively directed to
freaking Sara out. (As they each know, Sara is so robust that finding
only slugs or only worms in her clothing would barely perturb her.) Now
let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that freaking Sara out isn’t
an outcome that is represented motorically on this occasion. So Hannah’s
and Lucas’ actions could not be coordinated around this outcome by
virtue of motor representations of it. However, their acting together
may well involve them passing objects between them, reaching in a
coordinated way, and one holding the hat while the other drops worms
into it. Such very small scale actions are the sort most plausibly
coordinated by the interagential structure of motor representations we
have identified.</p>
<p>Is there any empirical motivation for our conjecture that certain
interagential structures of motor representations can enable
interpersonal coordination? Contrast acting together with a purpose and
acting in parallel but merely alone. Even where these two require the
same joint displacements and bodily configurations, the conjecture we
have just introduced implies that they can differ motorically: acting
together with a purpose, unlike acting in parallel, provides reason to
expect that there will be motor representations concerning another’s
action in each agent. <span class="citation"
data-cites="dellagatta:2017_drawn">della Gatta et al. (2017)</span> set
out to test just this prediction and found some evidence for it (as we
discuss in <span class="citation"
data-cites="sinigaglia:2020_motor_joint_experience">(Sinigaglia and
Butterfill 2020, 189)</span>). A further test of the prediction is
provided by <span class="citation" data-cites="clarke:2019_joint">Clarke
et al. (2019)</span>, who use an entirely different paradigm. And
although they do not frame it in our terms, the results of <span
class="citation" data-cites="sacheli:2018_evidence">Sacheli, Arcangeli,
and Paulesu (2018)</span> can also be interpreted as supporting the
conjecture. Further, less direct evidence for the conjecture is provided
by some earlier studies including <span class="citation"
data-cites="kourtis:2012_predictive kourtis:2014_attention meyer:2011_joint">Kourtis,
Sebanz, and Knoblich (2013; Kourtis et al. 2014; Meyer et al.
2011)</span>.</p>
<p>While more evidence would be needed for us to know that the
conjecture is true, it is clearly precise enough to generate readily
testable (and actually tested) predictions and there is already enough
evidence to motivate considering it as a candidate for truth. But there
are also theoretical objections to the conjecture.</p>
<h1 id="sec:two_objections">Two Objections</h1>
<p>The conjecture we have just provided evidence for is that motor
representations can enable interpersonal coordination. Or, more
accurately: motor representations of outcomes can be components of
certain interagential structures (specified in section <a
href="#sec:coordination" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:coordination">4</a>), and, where some actions are
collectively directed to these outcomes, the structures can facilitate
interpersonal coordination of the actions around the outcomes.</p>
<p>In this section we reply to two objections to our conjecture’s
theoretical coherence. The first objection concerns what is represented
motorically, whereas the second hinges on considerations about the
direction of fit of motor representation.</p>
<p>There are limits on which outcomes can be represented motorically.
Some such limits are linked to peculiarities of the agent in which the
motor representation occurs, and, in particular, to the range of actions
she can perform. For example, whether the grasping of a particular
object can be represented motorically may depend in part on whether the
agent can reach it <span class="citation"
data-cites="costantini:2010_where costantini:2011_tool">(Costantini et
al. 2010, 2011)</span>. Doesn’t this make it incoherent for us to
conjecture that, without any relevant ignorance or irrationality, there
are motor representations concerning actions another will perform? After
all, no agent can perform another’s actions—at least not in the cases we
are primarily concerned with. <a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref12" role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
<p>In replying to this first objection it is helpful to invoke the
notion of agent-neutrality. By saying that a representation is
<em>agent-neutral</em>, we mean that its content does not specify any
particular agent or agents. It is plausible that some motor processes
involve agent-neutral representations of outcomes <span class="citation"
data-cites="ramsey:2010_understanding">(Ramsey and Hamilton
2010)</span>. Indeed, that some motor representations are agent-neutral
is implied by Jeannerod’s argument for the view that motor
representations concerning your own actions are ‘entangled’ with motor
representations concerning others’ actions in such a way that knowing
which actions are yours requires the two to be disentangled. <a
href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a></p>
<p>The agent-neutrality of some motor representations allows us to
clarify what is involved in one agent having motor representations
concerning another’s actions. The first agent does represent outcomes to
which the other’s actions are, or will be, directed; and, normally,
these representations occur in part because the other’s actions are, or
will be, directed to these outcomes. But the contents of these
representations, which are agent-neutral, do not specify the other (or
the self) as the agent. It follows that an action’s having someone other
than you as its agent is not necessarily a barrier to the occurrence in
you of motor representations concerning that action.</p>
<p>The first objection concerned content. A second objection concerns
direction of fit. It may seem that our conjecture entails that there is
a single kind of representation, motor representation, different
instances of which have different directions of fit. Apparently, some
are world-to-mind insofar as they are supposed to lead to performing
actions, while others are mind-to-world insofar as they are supposed to
enable predictions of others’ actions.</p>
<p>This objection arises because of a point of contrast between
intention and motor representation. On some accounts (<span
class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014)</span>’s,
for instance), two agents’ having a shared intention involves each of
them having knowledge of the other’s intentions. They do not, of course,
intend actions the other will perform (at least not on many accounts;
but see <span class="citation" data-cites="Roth:2004ki">(Roth
2004)</span>). By contrast, where motor representations are involved in
enabling interpersonal coordination, the conjecture under consideration
is that in each agent there are motor representations concerning actions
that she will eventually perform and also motor representations—not
knowledge of motor representations but actual motor
representations—concerning actions that another will eventually perform.
So because our conjecture involves saying that there is just one kind of
representation here, it appears to entail that different instances of a
single attitude can have different directions of fit: some are
world-to-mind, others are mind-to-world. But this is arguably
incoherent. <a href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a> So the second objection. <a
href="#fn15" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a></p>
<p>As a preliminary to replying to the second objection, consider an
analogy. There is a rotary dial on your oven which enables you to
initiate and control the oven’s activity. We might think of the dial as
having an oven-to-instrument direction of fit: the oven temperature is
supposed to adjust to the setting on the dial. But now suppose, further,
that there is an indicator light on your oven which is illuminated
unless the oven has reached the temperature specified by the dial. This
enables you to use the dial to discover the temperature of the oven: if
the light is on, you turn the dial down until just the point where the
light goes off. Now the setting on the dial tells you the temperature of
the oven. So we might think of the dial as having an instrument-to-oven
direction of fit.</p>
<p>This analogy will guide our response to the second objection. The key
point can be put like this. There is a core system featuring the dial,
thermostat, heating element and oven. Relative to this core system, the
dial always has an oven-to-instrument direction of fit. However, there
is a larger system which embeds the core system and exploits it for
novel ends. This larger system includes you and your capacity to
temporarily prevent significant changes in the temperature of the oven
(perhaps by moving the dial between settings too quickly for the heating
element to respond). Relative to this larger system the dial has an
instrument-to-oven direction of fit. So to understand the dial’s
functions, we do need two directions of fit, oven-to-instrument and
instrument-to-oven. But this is not quite to say that the dial has both
directions of fit. For something has a direction of fit only relative to
a particular system. Which direction of fit we see depends on which
system we are considering. Understanding the dial does not require
supposing that anything has two directions of fit relative to a single
system.</p>
<p>Our response to the second objection is similar. If we consider
planning-like motor processes only (the core system), then each motor
representation’s function is linked to initiating and controlling
action. From this perspective, only a world-to-mind direction of fit is
in view. But these planning-like motor processes can occur in the
context of a larger system, one which involves something that somehow
prevents performance of action. The functions of this larger system
concern predicting which outcomes actions will be directed to. If we
consider this larger system, it is natural to describe the motor
representations as having a mind-to-world direction of fit. So, as in
our analogy, which direction of fit we see depends on which system we
are considering. Our reply to the second objection, then, is that our
conjecture involves no incoherence when properly understood.</p>
<h1 id="sec:collective_goals_motor_representations">How Are Actions
Linked to Outcomes when Acting Together?</h1>
<p>Our discussion so far has concerned the coordination of actions
people perform when acting together with a purpose. How is this relevant
to our opening question, which is about understanding in virtue of what
actions performed in acting together with a purpose can be collectively
directed to outcomes?</p>
<p>The interagential structure of motor representations we identified
can be used in linking actions to outcomes. For some (but not all) cases
in which people act together with a purpose, we can explain in virtue of
what their actions are collectively directed to an outcome by invoking
this interagential structure of motor representations. To see how this
works, consider first how accounts of shared intention suggest a way of
linking actions to outcomes. On at least some accounts of shared
intention, <a href="#fn16" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref16"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a> shared intentions relate things we
do together to actual or possible outcomes. Suppose we have a shared
intention that we move the piano. Then, on these accounts, our having a
shared intention consists in part in each of us intending that we, you
and I, move the piano, or in each of us being in some other state which
specifies this outcome. The shared intention also provides for the
coordination of our actions (so that, for example, you don’t attempt to
take one route while I pursue another). And coordination of this type
would normally facilitate occurrences of the type of outcome intended.
When people act together with a purpose, this is one way of explicating
what it is for their actions to be collectively directed to an outcome.
But the interagential structure of motor representations we identified
can be used in giving an alternative, structurally parallel explication.
For, as we specified in section <a href="#sec:coordination"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:coordination">4</a>, this
interagential structure involves there being a single outcome such that
there is a representation in each agent of this outcome, and these
representations provide for coordination of the agents’ actions where
coordination of this type would normally facilitate occurrences of
outcomes of this type. It is therefore possible to link actions to
outcomes by appeal to this interagential structure of motor
representations.</p>
<p>The result of our investigation implies that this is not merely
possible: sometimes it is actually in virtue of a certain interagential
structure of motor representation that two or more agents’ actions are
collectively directed to an outcome.</p>
<p>Some may attempt to resist this conclusion on the grounds that the
interagential structure of motor representations identified in section
<a href="#sec:coordination" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:coordination">4</a> is not something other than
shared intention, but simply one kind of shared intention. To see that
this is false, consider that shared intentions, whatever exactly they
turn out to be, are inferentially and normatively integrated with
ordinary, individual intentions. To illustrate, tonight there is a party
and a ceremony. It is impossible for anyone to attend both, and this is
common knowledge among Lily and Isabel. They have a shared intention
that they attend the ceremony together. But while having this shared
intention, Isabel also intends to go to the party. Given their common
knowledge, this combination of shared and individual intentions is
irrational. Its irrationality is related to that which might be involved
in Isabel individually intending to attend the ceremony while also
individually intending to go to the party. By contrast, as already
mentioned (see section <a href="#sec:acting_alone"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:acting_alone">2</a>),
motor representations are not inferentially or normatively integrated
with intentions: they do not feature in practical reasoning, nor in any
inferences in which intentions also feature; and if there are any
normative requirements linking the contents of intentions with the
contents of motor representations at all, these are distinct from those
governing intentions. So even where the actions of agents who are acting
together are collectively directed to outcomes in virtue of an
interagential structure of motor representations, the occurrence of this
structure in the agents does not amount to their having a shared
intention.</p>
<p>A basic requirement on any account of acting together with a purpose
is that it explain in virtue of what actions performed in acting
together are collectively directed to outcomes. The interagential
structure of motor representation we have identified is needed to
explain this. Motor representation must therefore feature in any
adequate account of acting together with a purpose. <a href="#fn17"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref17"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a></p>
<h1 id="conclusion">Conclusion</h1>
<p>We started by asking, When people act together with a purpose, in
virtue of what are their actions collectively directed to an outcome?
Our answer is that this is sometimes a matter of a certain interagential
structure of motor representations being realised and playing a role in
coordinating the actions (see section <a
href="#sec:collective_goals_motor_representations"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_goals_motor_representations">6</a> for
the conjecture; the interagential structure is specified in section <a
href="#sec:coordination" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:coordination">4</a>). How did we arrive at this
answer? We first identified evidence supporting the hypothesis that when
people act together with a purpose, outcomes to which their actions are
collectively directed are sometimes represented motorically (see section
<a href="#sec:collective_goals_are_represented"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_goals_are_represented">3</a>). This
allowed us to make a conjecture about how motor representations of such
outcomes facilitate interpersonal coordination (see section <a
href="#sec:coordination" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:coordination">4</a>). Sometimes these motor
representations trigger processes in each agent which result in matching
plan-like hierarchies concerning not only actions to be performed by the
agent herself but also actions that another will eventually perform.
These matching hierarchies realise an interagential structure that could
facilitate coordination of the actions performed by people acting
together with a purpose. This conjecture is theoretically coherent and
empirically motivated (see section <a href="#sec:two_objections"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:two_objections">5</a>). It
suggests a way of generalising a view about acting alone with a purpose
to cases of acting together with a purpose. When an agent acts alone
with a purpose, sometimes it is motor representations that ground the
directedness of her actions to an outcome. Similarly, we argued (in
section <a href="#sec:collective_goals_motor_representations"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_goals_motor_representations">6</a>), when
agents act together with a purpose, their actions are sometimes
collectively directed to an outcome in virtue of an interagential
structure of motor representations.</p>
<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
data-entry-spacing="0" role="list">
<div id="ref-alonso_shared_2009" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Alonso, Facundo M. 2009. <span>“Shared Intention, Reliance, and
Interpersonal Obligations.”</span> <em>Ethics</em> 119 (3): 444–75. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1086/599984">https://doi.org/10.1086/599984</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-bach:1978_representational" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Bach, Kent. 1978. <span>“A Representational Theory of Action.”</span>
<em>Philosophical Studies</em> 34 (4): 361–79. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00364703">https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00364703</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-bicchieri:2016_norms" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Bicchieri, Cristina. 2016. <em>Norms in the Wild: How to Diagnose,
Measure, and Change Social Norms</em>. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-blomberg:2015_common" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Blomberg, Olle. 2016. <span>“Common <span>Knowledge</span> and
<span>Reductionism</span> about <span>Shared Agency</span>.”</span>
<em>Australasian Journal of Philosophy</em> 94 (2): 315–26. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2015.1055581">https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2015.1055581</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1984jr" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Bratman, Michael E. 1984. <span>“Two Faces of Intention.”</span> <em>The
Philosophical Review</em> 93 (3): 375–405.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1987xw" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 1987. <em>Intentions, Plans, and Practical Reasoning</em>.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1992mi" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 1992. <span>“Shared Cooperative Activity.”</span> <em>The
Philosophical Review</em> 101 (2): 327–41.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1993je" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 1993. <span>“Shared Intention.”</span> <em>Ethics</em> 104: 97–113.
</div>
<div id="ref-bratman:2014_book" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2014. <em>Shared Agency: A Planning Theory of Acting Together</em>.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. <a
href="http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199897933.001.0001">http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199897933.001.0001</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-butterfill:2012_intention" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Butterfill, Stephen A., and Corrado Sinigaglia. 2014. <span>“Intention
and Motor Representation in Purposive Action.”</span> <em>Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research</em> 88 (1): 119–45. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1933-1592.2012.00604.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1933-1592.2012.00604.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-clarke:2019_joint" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Clarke, Sam, Luke McEllin, Anna Francová, Marcell Székely, Stephen A.
Butterfill, and John Michael. 2019. <span>“Joint Action Goals Reduce
Visuomotor Interference Effects from a Partner’s Incongruent
Actions.”</span> <em>Scientific Reports</em> 9 (1): 1–9. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-52124-6">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-52124-6</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-cohen:2004_wherea" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Cohen, Rajal G., and David A. Rosenbaum. 2004. <span>“Where Grasps Are
Made Reveals How Grasps Are Planned: Generation and Recall of Motor
Plans.”</span> <em>Experimental Brain Research</em> 157 (4): 486–95. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-004-1862-9">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-004-1862-9</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-costantini:2011_tool" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Costantini, Marcello, Ettore Ambrosini, Corrado Sinigaglia, and Vittorio
Gallese. 2011. <span>“Tool-Use Observation Makes Far Objects
Ready-to-Hand.”</span> <em>Neuropsychologia</em> 49 (9): 2658–63. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.05.013">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.05.013</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-costantini:2010_where" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Costantini, Marcello, Ettore Ambrosini, Gaetano Tieri, Corrado
Sinigaglia, and Giorgia Committeri. 2010. <span>“Where Does an Object
Trigger an Action? An Investigation about Affordances in Space.”</span>
<em>Experimental Brain Research</em> 207 (1-2): 95–103. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-010-2435-8">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-010-2435-8</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-dellagatta:2017_drawn" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
della Gatta, Francesco, Francesca Garbarini, Marco Rabuffetti, Luca
Viganò, Stephen A. Butterfill, and Corrado Sinigaglia. 2017.
<span>“Drawn Together: <span>When</span> Motor Representations Ground
Joint Actions.”</span> <em>Cognition</em> 165: 53–60. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.04.008">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.04.008</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-diedrichsen:2003_anticipatory" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Diedrichsen, Jörn, Timothy Verstynen, Andrew Hon, Steven L. Lehman, and
Richard B. Ivry. 2003. <span>“Anticipatory Adjustments in the Unloading
Task: Is an Efference Copy Necessary for Learning?”</span>
<em>Experimental Brain Research</em> 148 (2): 272–76. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-002-1318-z">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-002-1318-z</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-gallese:2001_shared" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Gallese, V. 2001. <span>“The ’Shared Manifold’ Hypothesis. From Mirror
Neurons to Empathy.”</span> <em>Journal of Consciousness Studies</em> 8
(5-6): 33–50.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert_walking_1990" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Gilbert, Margaret P. 1990. <span>“Walking Together: A Paradigmatic
Social Phenomenon.”</span> <em>Midwest Studies in Philosophy</em> 15:
1–14.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert:2014_book" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2013. <em>Joint Commitment: How We Make the Social World</em>.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. <a
href="http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199970148.001.0001">http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199970148.001.0001</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Gold:2007zd" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Gold, Natalie, and Robert Sugden. 2007. <span>“Collective Intentions and
Team Agency.”</span> <em>Journal of Philosophy</em> 104 (3): 109–37.
</div>
<div id="ref-grafton:2007_evidence" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Grafton, Scott T., and Antonia F. de C. Hamilton. 2007. <span>“Evidence
for a Distributed Hierarchy of Action Representation in the
Brain.”</span> <em>Human Movement Science</em> 26 (4): 590–616. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2007.05.009">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2007.05.009</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-helm_plural_2008" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Helm, Bennett W. 2008. <span>“Plural Agents.”</span> <em>Nous</em> 42
(1): 17–49. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00672.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00672.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-issartel:2007_unintended" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Issartel, Johann, Ludovic Marin, and Marielle Cadopi. 2007.
<span>“Unintended Interpersonal Co-Ordination: <span>‘Can We March to
the Beat of Our Own Drum?’</span>”</span> <em>Neuroscience Letters</em>
411 (3): 174–79. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2006.09.086">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2006.09.086</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-jackson:2002_functional" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Jackson, G. M, K German, and K Peacock. 2002. <span>“Functional Coupling
Between the Limbs During Bimanual Reach-to-Grasp Movements.”</span>
<em>Human Movement Science</em> 21 (3): 5–21. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-9457(02)00118-5">https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-9457(02)00118-5</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-jeannerod:1988_neural" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Jeannerod, Marc. 1988. <em>The Neural and Behavioural Organization of
Goal-Directed Movements</em>. <span>New York</span>: <span>Oxford
University Press</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-jeannerod:2003_mechanism" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
———. 2003. <span>“The Mechanism of Self-Recognition in Humans.”</span>
<em>Behavioural Brain Research</em> 142 (1-2): 1–15. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4328(02)00384-4">https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4328(02)00384-4</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-kawato:1999_internal" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kawato, Mitsuo. 1999. <span>“Internal Models for Motor Control and
Trajectory Planning.”</span> <em>Current Opinion in Neurobiology</em> 9
(6): 718–27. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(99)00028-8">https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(99)00028-8</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-kelso:1979_coordination" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kelso, J., Dan Southard, and David Goodman. 1979. <span>“<a
href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/528935">On the Coordination of
Two-Handed Movements</a>.”</span> <em>Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance</em> 5 (2): 229–38.
</div>
<div id="ref-kourtis:2014_attention" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kourtis, Dimitrios, Günther Knoblich, Mateusz Woźniak, and Natalie
Sebanz. 2014. <span>“<span class="nocase">Attention Allocation and Task
Representation during Joint Action Planning</span>.”</span>
<em><span>Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience</span></em> 26 (10):
2275–86. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00634">https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00634</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-kourtis:2012_predictive" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kourtis, Dimitrios, Natalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich. 2013.
<span>“Predictive Representation of Other People’s Actions in Joint
Action Planning: An <span>EEG</span> Study.”</span> <em>Social
Neuroscience</em> 8 (1): 31–42. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2012.694823">https://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2012.694823</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Kutz:2000si" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kutz, Christopher. 2000. <span>“Acting Together.”</span> <em>Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research</em> 61 (1): 1–31.
</div>
<div id="ref-loehr:2013_monitoring" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Loehr, Janeen D, Dimitrios Kourtis, Cordula Vesper, Natalie Sebanz, and
Günther Knoblich. 2013. <span>“Monitoring Individual and Joint Action
Outcomes in Duet Music Performance.”</span> <em>Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience</em> 25 (7): 1049–61.
</div>
<div id="ref-loehr:2015_sound" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Loehr, Janeen D., and Cordula Vesper. 2015. <span>“The Sound of You and
Me: Novices Represent Shared Goals in Joint Action.”</span> <em>The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology</em> 0 (ja): 1–30. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1061029">https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1061029</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ludwig:2016_individual" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ludwig, Kirk. 2016. <em>From <span>Individual</span> to <span>Plural
Agency</span>: <span>Collective Action</span></em>. <span>Oxford
University Press</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Menoret:2013fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ménoret, Mathilde, L. Varnet, R. Fargier, A. Cheylus, A. Curie, V. des
Portes, T. A. Nazir, and Y. Paulignan. 2014. <span>“Neural Correlates of
Non-Verbal Social Interactions: A Dual-EEG Study.”</span>
<em>Neuropsychologia</em> 55: 75–97.
</div>
<div id="ref-meyer:2011_joint" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Meyer, Marlene, Sabine Hunnius, Michiel van Elk, Freek van Ede, and
Harold Bekkering. 2011. <span>“Joint Action Modulates Motor System
Involvement During Action Observation in 3-Year-Olds.”</span>
<em>Experimental Brain Research</em> 211 (3-4): 581–92. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-011-2658-3">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-011-2658-3</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-meyer:2013_higher-order" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Meyer, Marlene, Robrecht P. R. D. van der Wel, and Sabine Hunnius. 2013.
<span>“Higher-Order Action Planning for Individual and Joint Object
Manipulations.”</span> <em>Experimental Brain Research</em> 225 (4):
579–88. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3398-8">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3398-8</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-michael:2022_book" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Michael, John. 2022. <em>The Philosophy and Psychology of
Commitment</em>. London: Routledge.
</div>
<div id="ref-millikan:1995_pushmi-pullyu" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Millikan, Ruth Garrett. 1995. <span>“Pushmi-Pullyu
Representations.”</span> <em>Philosophical Perspectives</em> 9: 185–200.
<a
href="https://doi.org/10.2307/2214217">https://doi.org/10.2307/2214217</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-novembre:2013_motor" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Novembre, G., L. F. Ticini, S. Schutz-Bosbach, and P. E. Keller. 2014.
<span>“Motor Simulation and the Coordination of Self and Other in
Real-Time Joint Action.”</span> <em>Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience</em> 9 (8): 1062–68. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst086">https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst086</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-oullier:2008_social" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Oullier, Olivier, Gonzalo C. de Guzman, Kelly J. Jantzen, Julien
Lagarde, and J. A. Scott Kelso. 2008. <span>“Social Coordination
Dynamics: Measuring Human Bonding.”</span> <em>Social Neuroscience</em>
3 (2): 178. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/17470910701563392">https://doi.org/10.1080/17470910701563392</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-pacherie:2000_content" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Pacherie, Elisabeth. 2000. <span>“The Content of Intentions.”</span>
<em>Mind and Language</em> 15 (4): 400–432. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0017.00142">https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0017.00142</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-pacherie:2008_action" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2008. <span>“The Phenomenology of Action: A Conceptual
Framework.”</span> <em>Cognition</em> 107 (1): 179–217. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2007.09.003">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2007.09.003</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-pacherie:2011_nonconceptual" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
———. 2011. <span>“Nonconceptual <span>Representations</span> for
<span>Action</span> and the <span>Limits</span> of <span>Intentional
Control</span>.”</span> <em>Social Psychology</em> 42 (1): 67–73. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1027/1864-9335/a000044">https://doi.org/10.1027/1864-9335/a000044</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-pacherie:2013_lite" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2013. <span>“Intentional Joint Agency: Shared Intention
Lite.”</span> <em>Synthese</em> 190 (10): 1817–39. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-013-0263-7">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-013-0263-7</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Pacherie:2006dl" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Pacherie, Elisabeth, and Jérôme Dokic. 2006. <span>“From Mirror Neurons
to Joint Actions.”</span> <em>Cognitive Systems Research</em> 7 (2-3):
101–12.
</div>
<div id="ref-piedimonte:2015_invisible" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Piedimonte, Alessandro, Francesca Garbarini, Marco Rabuffetti, Lorenzo
Pia, Angelo Montesano, Maurizio Ferrarin, and Anna Berti. 2015.
<span>“Invisible <span>Grasps</span>: <span>Grip Interference</span> in
<span>Anosognosia</span> for <span>Hemiplegia</span>.”</span>
<em>Neuropsychology</em> 29 (5): 776–81. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000182">https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000182</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-prinz:1990_cc" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Prinz, Wolfgang. 1990. <span>“A Common Coding Approach to Perception and
Action.”</span> In <em>Relationships Between Perception and Action</em>,
edited by Odmar Neumann and Wolfgang Prinz, 167–201. Berlin: Springer.
</div>
<div id="ref-prinz:1997_perception" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 1997. <span>“Perception and Action Planning.”</span> <em>European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology</em> 9 (2): 129–54. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/713752551">https://doi.org/10.1080/713752551</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ramenzoni:2014_scaling" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ramenzoni, Verónica C., Natalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich. 2014.
<span>“Scaling up Perception<span></span>action Links: Evidence from
Synchronization with Individual and Joint Action.”</span> <em>Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance</em> 40 (4):
1551–65. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036925">https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036925</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ramsey:2010_understanding" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Ramsey, Richard, and Antonia F. de C. Hamilton. 2010.
<span>“Understanding Actors and Object-Goals in the Human Brain.”</span>
<em>Neuroimage</em> 50 (3): 1142–47.
</div>
<div id="ref-rizzolatti_mirrors_2008" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Rizzolatti, Giacomo, and Corrado Sinigaglia. 2008. <em>Mirrors in the
Brain: How Our Minds Share Actions, Emotions</em>. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-rizzolatti_functional_2010" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
———. 2010. <span>“The Functional Role of the Parieto-Frontal Mirror
Circuit: Interpretations and Misinterpretations.”</span> <em>Nature
Reviews: Neuroscience</em> 11 (4): 264–74. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2805">https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2805</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-rodl:2018_joint" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Rödl, Sebastian. 2018. <span>“Joint <span>Action</span> and <span>Plural
Self</span>-<span>Consciousness</span>.”</span> <em>Journal of Social
Philosophy</em> 49 (1): 124–36. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/josp.12226">https://doi.org/10.1111/josp.12226</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-roessler:2020_plural" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Roessler, Johannes. 2024. <span>“Plural Practical Knowledge.”</span>
<em>Inquiry</em> 67 (4): 1–20. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2020.1787221">https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2020.1787221</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-rosenbaum:2010_human" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Rosenbaum, David A. 2009. <em>Human Motor Control</em>. 2nd ed. San
Diego, <span>CA</span>, <span>US</span>: Academic Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-rosenbaum:2012_cognition" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Rosenbaum, David A., Kate M. Chapman, Matthias Weigelt, Daniel J. Weiss,
and Robrecht P. R. D. van der Wel. 2012. <span>“Cognition, Action, and
Object Manipulation.”</span> <em>Psychological Bulletin</em> 138 (5):
924–46. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027839">https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027839</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Roth:2004ki" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Roth, Abraham Sesshu. 2004. <span>“Shared Agency and Contralateral
Commitments.”</span> <em>The Philosophical Review</em> 113 (3): 359–410.
</div>
<div id="ref-sacheli:2018_evidence" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sacheli, Lucia Maria, Elisa Arcangeli, and Eraldo Paulesu. 2018.
<span>“Evidence for a Dyadic Motor Plan in Joint Action.”</span>
<em>Scientific Reports</em> 8 (1): 5027. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-23275-9">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-23275-9</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-santello:2002_patterns" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Santello, Marco, Martha Flanders, and John F. Soechting. 2002.
<span>“Patterns of Hand Motion During Grasping and the Influence of
Sensory Guidance.”</span> <em>The Journal of Neuroscience</em> 22 (4):
1426–35. <a
href="http://www.jneurosci.org/content/22/4/1426.abstract">http://www.jneurosci.org/content/22/4/1426.abstract</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-satne:2020_practical" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Satne, Glenda Lucila. 2020. <span>“Practical Knowledge and Shared
Agency: Pluralizing the <span>Anscombean</span> View.”</span>
<em>Inquiry</em> forthcoming: 1–28. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2020.1837236">https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2020.1837236</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Schmid:2013_self" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Schmid, Hans Bernhard. 2013. <span>“Plural Self-Awareness.”</span>
<em><span>Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences</span></em> 13 (1):
1–18. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-013-9317-z">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-013-9317-z</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Searle:1983tx" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Searle, John R. 1983. <em>Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of
Mind</em>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-Searle:1990em" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 1990. <span>“Collective Intentions and Actions.”</span> In
<em>Intentions in Communication</em>, edited by P. Cohen, J. Morgan, and
M. E. Pollack, 90–105. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-shepherd:2015_conscious" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Shepherd, Joshua. 2015. <span>“Conscious <span>Control</span> over
<span>Action</span>.”</span> <em>Mind &amp; Language</em> 30 (3):
320–44. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/mila.12082">https://doi.org/10.1111/mila.12082</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-sinigaglia:2020_motor_joint_experience" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Sinigaglia, Corrado, and Stephen A. Butterfill. 2020. <span>“Motor
Representation and Action Experience in Joint Action.”</span> In
<em>Minimal Cooperation and Shared Agency</em>, edited by Anika Fiebich,
181–94. Studies in the <span>Philosophy</span> of
<span>Sociality</span>. <span>Springer International Publishing</span>.
<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29783-1">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29783-1</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Sugden:2000mw" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sugden, Robert. 2000. <span>“Team Preferences.”</span> <em>Economics and
Philosophy</em> 16: 175–204.
</div>
<div id="ref-tessitore:2013_hierarchical" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Tessitore, G., Corrado Sinigaglia, and R. Prevete. 2013.
<span>“Hierarchical and Multiple Hand Action Representation Using
Temporal Postural Synergies.”</span> <em>Experimental Brain
Research</em> 225 (1): 11–36. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3344-9">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3344-9</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-tsai:2011_groop_effect" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Tsai, Jessica Chia-Chin, Natalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich. 2011.
<span>“The <span>GROOP</span> Effect: Groups Mimic Group
Actions.”</span> <em>Cognition</em> 118 (1): 135–40. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.10.007">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.10.007</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-tuomela:2000_cooperation" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Tuomela, Raimo. 2000. <em>Cooperation: <span>A Philosophical
Study</span></em>. Dordrecht: Springer.
</div>
<div id="ref-wolpert:1995internal" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Wolpert, Daniel M., Z Ghahramani, and Mi Jordan. 1995. <span>“An
Internal Model for Sensorimotor Integration.”</span> <em>Science</em>
269 (5232): 1880–82. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7569931">https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7569931</a>.
</div>
</div>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1"><p>Gilbert and Tuomela each use the term ‘acting together’
as if it applied far more narrowly (compare <span class="citation"
data-cites="tuomela:2000_cooperation">Tuomela (2000, 7)</span>: ‘Acting
together involves sociality in the relatively strong sense that such
action must be based on joint intention or shared collective goal.’). We
take this to be a terminological issue. Just as it is coherent to say
that the three legs of a tripod support a flask together, so it seems to
us coherent to say that people vibrating and disturbing a fatberg are
unblocking the drain together.<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn2"><p>Endorsing these minimal requirements does not imply that
they are sufficient. Accordingly, we are neutral on whether any of the
researchers just cited may be sources of further necessary
requirements.<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn3"><p>In general, a <em>very small scale action</em> is one
that is typically distantly related as a descendent by the means-ends
relation to the actions which are sometimes described as ‘small scale’
actions, such as playing a sonata, cooking a meal or painting a house
(e.g. <span class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman
2014, 8)</span>; <span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert_walking_1990">(Gilbert 1990, 178)</span>). It is
sometimes suggested that standard accounts of acting together are
ill-suited to characterising large-scale interactions <span
class="citation" data-cites="Kutz:2000si">(e.g. Kutz 2000)</span>. They
may also fail to characterise very small-scale interactions.<a
href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn4"><p>Much more could be said about what motor representations
are and why they are necessary; key sources include <span
class="citation" data-cites="rosenbaum:2010_human">Rosenbaum
(2009)</span>, <span class="citation" data-cites="prinz:1990_cc">Prinz
(1990)</span>, <span class="citation"
data-cites="wolpert:1995internal">Wolpert, Ghahramani, and Jordan
(1995)</span>, <span class="citation"
data-cites="jeannerod:1988_neural">Jeannerod (1988)</span> and <span
class="citation" data-cites="rizzolatti_mirrors_2008">Rizzolatti and
Sinigaglia (2008)</span>. Related theoretical considerations have also
been identified by philosophers, notably by <span class="citation"
data-cites="bach:1978_representational">Bach (1978)</span> on ‘executive
representations’.<a href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn5"><p>For further supporting considerations, see <span
class="citation" data-cites="prinz:1997_perception">Prinz (1997,
143–46)</span>, <span class="citation"
data-cites="pacherie:2008_action">Pacherie (2008)</span> and <span
class="citation" data-cites="butterfill:2012_intention">Butterfill and
Sinigaglia (2014, 121–24)</span>.<a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn6"><p>Another part of the answer concerns the role of motor
representation of outcomes in reducing the number of kinematic
parameters to be computed, which facilitates planning and control of
action (see, for example, <span class="citation"
data-cites="santello:2002_patterns">(Santello, Flanders, and Soechting
2002)</span>; <span class="citation"
data-cites="tessitore:2013_hierarchical">(Tessitore, Sinigaglia, and
Prevete 2013)</span>).<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn7"><p>Full discussion of the distinction between intention and
motor representation is beyond the scope of this paper. <span
class="citation" data-cites="butterfill:2012_intention">Butterfill and
Sinigaglia (2014, 124–30)</span> offer some further considerations. See
further <span class="citation"
data-cites="pacherie:2000_content pacherie:2011_nonconceptual shepherd:2015_conscious">Pacherie
(2000, 2011; Shepherd 2015)</span>.<a href="#fnref7"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn8"><p>Note that this conclusion is neutral on whether all
actions involve intentions. After all, a single action may involve both
intention and motor representation <span class="citation"
data-cites="butterfill:2012_intention">(Butterfill and Sinigaglia
2014)</span>.<a href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn9"><p>Further relevant findings include <span class="citation"
data-cites="loehr:2015_sound novembre:2013_motor">Janeen D. Loehr and
Vesper (2015; Novembre et al. 2014)</span>.<a href="#fnref9"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn10"><p>Far from being entirely novel, this conjecture is a
version of <span class="citation" data-cites="Pacherie:2006dl">Pacherie
and Dokic (2006, 111)</span>’s view that in ‘joint action control […]
each agent adjusts his own actions as a function of the common goal and
of the predicted consequences of the actions of other participants.’
Related ideas can also be found in <span class="citation"
data-cites="dellagatta:2017_drawn sacheli:2018_evidence clarke:2019_joint">della
Gatta et al. (2017; Sacheli, Arcangeli, and Paulesu 2018; Clarke et al.
2019)</span>.<a href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn11"><p>This should not be taken to imply that the motor
representations themselves specify self or other (see further section <a
href="#sec:two_objections" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:two_objections">5</a>).<a href="#fnref11"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn12"><p>A version of this objection is due to Wolfgang Prinz
(personal communication).<a href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn13"><p>See <span class="citation"
data-cites="jeannerod:2003_mechanism">Jeannerod (2003)</span>. For
arguments for the agent-neutrality of some motor representations, see
also <span class="citation" data-cites="gallese:2001_shared">Gallese
(2001)</span> and <span class="citation"
data-cites="Pacherie:2006dl">Pacherie and Dokic (2006)</span>.<a
href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn14"><p>Not everyone appears to find this incoherent <span
class="citation" data-cites="millikan:1995_pushmi-pullyu">(Millikan
1995, 191)</span>; but we shall concede that it is incoherent for the
sake of argument.<a href="#fnref14" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn15"><p>This objection is due to Michael Bratman (personal
communication).<a href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn16"><p>The following is true on accounts offered by <span
class="citation" data-cites="Bratman:1993je">Bratman (1993)</span>,
<span class="citation" data-cites="alonso_shared_2009">Alonso
(2009)</span> and <span class="citation"
data-cites="pacherie:2013_lite">Pacherie (2013)</span>; and it is
consistent with <span class="citation" data-cites="Searle:1990em">Searle
(1990)</span> and <span class="citation" data-cites="Kutz:2000si">Kutz
(2000)</span> among others.<a href="#fnref16" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn17"><p>Note that this claim is consistent with (and neutral
on) the view that shared intention is involved in every case of acting
together with a purpose. Our aim is to argue that an interagential
structure of motor representation is needed rather than that shared
intention is not needed.</p>
<p><span class="citation"
data-cites="sinigaglia:2020_motor_joint_experience">Sinigaglia and
Butterfill (2020)</span> propose a further, independent reason for
thinking that motor representation matters: it may ground experiences of
acting together with a purpose which are not merely experiences of
individual actions.<a href="#fnref17" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
</ol>
</section>

</div>
