--- 
title: "Mindreading is an Asynchronous Joint Activity: The M-a-J-a Account of Theory of Mind Performance, and Individual Differences"
authors: "Apperly, Ian and Devine, Rory T. and Butterfill, Stephen A."
year: 2025
doi: "10.2139/ssrn.5360183"
bibtex: "@article{apperly:2025_mindreading,\n    doi = {10.2139/ssrn.5360183},\n    url = {https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=5360183},\n    note = {[Online; accessed 2025-08-15]},\n    address = {Rochester, NY},\n    author = {Apperly, Ian and Devine, Rory T. and Butterfill, Stephen A.},\n    year = {2025},\n    month = {jul 21},\n    publisher = {Social Science Research Network},\n    title = {Mindreading is an {Asynchronous} {Joint} {Activity}: The {M}-a-{J}-a {Account} of {Theory} of {Mind} {Performance}, and {Individual} {Differences}},\n    type = {SSRN {Scholarly} {Paper}}\n}\n\n"
pdfUrl: "/pdf/apperly2025_mindreading.pdf"
---



<div class="fulltext">
<p><strong>Mindreading is an Asynchronous Joint Activity: The M-A-J-A
Account of Theory of Mind performance, and individual
differences.</strong></p>
<p><strong>Abstract</strong></p>
<p>Research on mindreading has been dominated by questions about the
presence, absence or nature of mindreading concepts or structures, and
by paradigms designed to create the most favourable circumstances for
demonstrating such abilities. This focus on competence has led to a
neglect of questions about performance. Yet without a theory of
performance, mindreading concepts and structures are incapable of
explaining how we ascribe particular thoughts and feelings to other
people, and it is impossible to explain individual differences in
mindreading that are persistent, robust, specific, and consequential for
social abilities. We reconsider the theoretical foundations of
mindreading to develop an account on which competent mindreading
requires generating and selecting mental states that can be recognised
as plausible and appropriate by other people, and so is essentially a
joint social activity. It is an asynchronous joint activity because,
once learned, it can be performed alone. The M-A-J-A (Mindreading as
Asynchronous Joint Activity) account explains how mindreading serves as
a mediator in human social lives, is shaped by social experience, varies
according to that experience, and enables social abilities that would
not be the same without its mediating role. The M-A-J-A account can
explain a swath of existing findings about individual differences in
mindreading that are otherwise puzzling. It provides a framework for
understanding how and why mindreading abilities might vary across the
lifespan, and for developing interpretable and psychometrically robust
measures to study this variation.</p>
<p>Keywords: mentalizing; theory of mind; joint action; individual
differences; psychometric</p>
<p>Forty years after the first empirical paper testing children’s false
belief reasoning, research on mindreading is still viewed predominantly
through the lens of early development. This focus on <em>when</em> such
abilities first occur has consequences for both theoretical and
empirical enquiry. Developmental theories tend to emphasise basic
structural necessities – such as concepts of belief, desire, intention
and the like (e.g., Carpendale &amp; Lewis, 2004 ; Doherty &amp; Perner,
2020; Tomasello, 2018, Wellman, 2014). Empirical studies prioritise
paradigms that are sensitive to the detection of such concepts (e.g.,
Scott &amp; Baillargeon, 2017). Of course, researchers have also
examined <em>how</em> mindreading develops in ontogeny (e.g. Devine
&amp; Lecce, 2021; Gopnik &amp; Meltzoff, 1997; Hughes, 2011; Tomasello,
2010), phylogeny (e.g., Krupenye &amp; Call, 2017; Martin &amp; Santos,
2016), and human history (e.g., Heyes, 2019; Moore, 2021), how it varies
between individuals and groups (e.g., Hughes &amp; Devine, 2015;
Osterhaus &amp; Bosacki, 2022; Yeung et al., 2024; Lillard, 1998), and
its cognitive (e.g., Apperly, 2010; Ferguson &amp; Bradford, 2021) and
neural basis (e.g., Gilead &amp; Oschner, 2021). However, the lens of
early development means that even this research is dominated by
questions about the presence, absence or nature of mindreading concepts
or structures, and by paradigms designed to create the most favourable
of circumstances for demonstrating such abilities. This is critically
limiting for both theoretical and empirical work. Theoretically,
concepts may be necessary for mindreading, but they are insufficient
because it remains unclear how someone with the necessary concepts is
ever in a position to use them effectively. Empirically, as we shall
review below, there is increasing evidence of individual differences in
mindreading that are persistent, robust, specific, and consequential,
yet we lack theories or tasks that cast light on the reasons for this
variation. After 40 years we still do not know how people ascribe any
specific mental state, nor why some people are better at this than
others. Our contention is that these basic questions are related and can
only be addressed by rethinking, from the foundations up, ideas about
what mindreading is and what makes it possible.</p>
<p>In what follows we first introduce our key ideas in outline form.
Next, we develop the theoretical basis for our contention, beginning
from foundations, and explore its consequences for how mindreading is
conceptualised. In the second half of the paper, we show how our
approach can address large gaps in current understanding of longitudinal
stability in mindreading and individual differences across the lifespan.
We end with a framework for the development of new measures. Such
measures would be a major improvement on current approaches because they
would make transparent what it means for a person to be more or less
good at mindreading.</p>
<h1 id="outline">Outline</h1>
<p>What does it mean to “be in a position” to use mindreading concepts
effectively? This is a question that we will tackle in stages, but let
us start by illustrating the essential problem using by far the most
widely-adopted paradigm for mindreading: false belief tasks. In one
classic form of false belief task (Wimmer &amp; Perner, 1983) Maxi
places his chocolate in the blue cupboard. While he is playing outside
his mother moves it to the green cupboard. Maxi returns, wanting his
chocolate. The critical question is where will he look for his
chocolate? Most people over the age of 4 or 5 years agree that he will
look in the blue cupboard, because that is where he falsely believes his
chocolate is located. But <em>why</em> do most people agree? Strictly
speaking, Maxi could reasonably think his chocolate is elsewhere - he
might have prior experience of his mother’s preference for storing food
in the green cupboard, he might have a prior agreement with his mother,
or he might have unusual beliefs about the behaviour of physical
objects. It is only the carefully-crafted pragmatic constraints of the
story (and our sensitivity to those constraints) that mean we are in a
position to conceive of only one possible correct answer. Such false
belief tasks are an essential workhorse of empirical research on
mindreading, but they also obscure the fact that the world is not
subject to the kinds of pragmatic constraints that govern storytelling
and does not typically come neatly curated into correct and incorrect
alternatives for what people think or feel. Outside such tightly
constrained tasks mindreaders must take on much more of the work of
homing in on plausible mental states. Understanding how we do this is an
essential and overlooked puzzle about mindreading.</p>
<p>Why are individual differences in mindreading informative for our
purposes? Again, we will tackle this in stages. But let us first
establish the intuition that there really is variation in mindreading
and explain why this might be puzzling. Imagine, for a moment, your
social network of adult friends, colleagues, and acquaintances. If it is
anything like ours then you might perceive substantial variation in
people’s social skills. You may also work in an environment that is
highly selective for academic ability. If your work environment is
anything like ours, then you might still perceive substantial variation
in social skills. That is to say, although general cognitive ability may
be relevant for social skills, it is clearly not a sufficient
explanation for their variation. As we will later describe, this
conclusion is also borne out by empirical investigations. The puzzle is
that adults, and indeed children from middle childhood onwards, tend to
pass tests for key mindreading concepts (e.g., Wellman, Fang, &amp;
Peterson, 2011). There are tests of “advanced” mindreading that continue
to pose varying degrees of challenge, and children’s earlier performance
on tests of mindreading concepts predict later success with “advanced”
mindreading (e.g., Devine, White, Ensor &amp; Hughes, 2016). However,
there is no theory of “advanced mindreading concepts” to explain what is
challenging about these tasks. Thus, the origin of individual
differences in “advanced” mindreading is a key point of failure for
existing concept-focused theories, and a key challenge for empirical
research is to devise mindreading tasks that do justice to the intuition
that some people appear better at this kind of thing than others.</p>
<h1 id="foundations">Foundations </h1>
<p>Giving someone a chef’s knife does not make them a chef; it may not
even make them good at cutting. Someone looking to employ a chef would
be pleased to see that they have a chef’s knife but would also want to
know that they were able to use it successfully. Research on mindreading
has been dominated by the first half of the job description, that is,
whether the mindreader has the necessary concepts and rules, while
neglecting the second half, that is, whether they can they use them
successfully. We believe that key puzzles in research on mindreading can
be traced to this neglect.</p>
<p>The issue of successfully using mindreading concepts and rules may
seem simple, a minor detail even. Yet comparison with linguistic
communication suggests otherwise. While much can be learned from the
study of words and linguistic rules, multiple additional fields of study
(for example, in phonetics and pragmatics) have proved necessary for
addressing how such elements of language are used for successful
communication. Likewise, understanding mindreading performance may
require fundamentally new ideas. To understand performance, we need an
account of successful mindreading.</p>
<p>It is commonly supposed that when we mindread, success consists in
identifying facts about mental states as accurately as possible. Framed
this way, one starts with an agent whose head is full of beliefs,
desires, and intentions that interact to cause the agent’s behaviour.
These mental states cannot be observed directly, and so the mindreader’s
job is to infer what they might be from the agent’s behaviour. Success
is determined by identifying as accurately as possible which mental
states the agent in fact has. To many readers this will seem so
obviously true that it does not need stating, and although it is seldom
stated this supposition is the foundation for most psychological
research on mindreading. But one does not need to look far for a
contrary view. Dennett’s (1988) “intentional stance” theory is widely
cited in empirical research on mindreading. Yet in Dennett’s framing
mental states are ascribed as an interpretive gloss over a set of
behaviours with no commitment to their neurocognitive basis. If
behaviour is predicted successfully then the mental state ascriptions
are accurate. The sense in which agents “have” mental states is
fundamentally different in this framing because the facts about mental
states are determined by whether mindreading succeeds or fails (and not
the other way around).</p>
<p>While Dennett focussed on successful prediction of behaviour as the
standard of success for mindreading, others have proposed widening the
standard to include success in attributing responsibility, making sense
of behaviours, and modulating behaviours or ‘mindshaping’ (e.g.,
Zawidzki, 2013). In what follows we offer a partial defence of these
insights and build on them to offer a refinement: successful mindreading
requires generating and selecting mental states that can be recognised
as plausible and appropriate by other people.</p>
<p>This view of successful mindreading need not be based on taking for
granted Dennett’s position. One can also support the view by starting
from an opposing theory on which facts about mental states do determine
whether mindreading is successful, namely Davidson’s (1973, 1985, 1990)
extensively developed theory.<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> Inspired by the success
of decision theory, and specifically by the possibility of treating
decision theory as an elucidation of what preferences are (Jeffrey,
1983),<a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> Davidson pointed to a set of
normative requirements which specify a structure to which, he claimed,
any mindreading target’s mental states must conform (Davidson, 1980, 7,
12).<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> To illustrate, one requirement is
that the target’s beliefs be logically consistent; another is that the
target and the mindreader agree about which observations provide
evidential support for which conclusion. Davidson demonstrated that this
structure makes it possible, in principle at least, to discover a
person’s mind through observation and communication.<a href="#fn4"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a>
Davidson’s theory also entails a clear view about what makes for better
or worse mindreading. In the same sense that there are facts about an
object’s weight or temperature, so also there are facts about a person’s
mental states; and better mindreading is more accurately identifying
those mental states.<a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
<p>But is this view true? Davidson’s theory was never supposed to be an
account of how people actually read others’ minds (Davidson, 1990),<a
href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a> but by articulating the
requirements-in-principle for accurate identification of mental states
it illuminates some challenges of mindreading in practice. As we will
see (in the section on <em>Formal Models</em>), these challenges also
arise for theories which attempt to describe how people actually read
others’ minds (e.g., Baker et al, 2017). Attention to the challenges
will lead us to a different view about what makes for better
mindreading.</p>
<p>The first challenge is the problem of infinite observations.
Davidson’s theory requires observations of ‘a potential infinity’ of
actions to identify any mental states at all (Davidson 1990, 314). In
order to ascribe to Maxi the belief that the chocolate is in the blue
cupboard the mindreader would need to observe all of the possible
consequences of that belief. Without doing so it is impossible to
exclude the potential infinity of variously similar but non-identical
beliefs (e.g., that he thinks the chocolate is in the blue cupboard
every day except Thursdays). By contrast, practical mindreading involves
not merely finite<del>,</del> but often very few observations, as
illustrated by even the simplified case of Maxi discussed above. How can
mindreaders coherently attribute any mental states based on few
observations? However they do this, it will amount to selecting one or
another set of background assumptions to fill in the missing
observations imaginatively. Which background assumptions should be
adopted? There are indefinitely many possible background assumptions
which could be used to fill in missing observations. We have already
illustrated this in the case of Maxi: when asked about his actions or
beliefs, many people assume, usually implicitly, that Maxi shares their
beliefs about the ways physical objects behave, that he has no
expectations about his chocolate moving while absent, and so on. These
implicit assumptions fill in for missing observations. But there are, of
course, other assumptions people could make which would lead them to
predict different actions and to attribute different mental states to
Maxi. And these alternative assumptions would not necessarily be wrong.
A group of people might be found to rely on different implicit
assumptions, and there would be no logical or rational grounds to
criticise them. The most we can say is that there is likely to be an
advantage in making roughly the same background assumptions as other
people with whom you might seek agreement, including Maxi.</p>
<p>This matters for understanding what skilled mindreading performance
is. Having the right concepts and rules is not sufficient. Practical
considerations will be needed in selecting background assumptions to
fill in missing observations. Whether particular background assumptions
are good may depend on a mindreader’s aims: what works well for
prediction may work less well when the aim is to assign blame or to
challenge another person’s self-understanding. Given the value of
agreement with others on which mental states a person has, whether
particular background assumptions are good may also depend on which
assumptions other mindreaders will make. One consequence is that better
mindreading is not a matter of more accurately identifying mental
states, because objective criteria for accuracy are not in play. Another
consequence is that better mindreaders may be more flexible in shifting
background assumptions between contexts, more willing to consider a
wider range of possible mental states when confidence in background
assumptions is lower, and better at aligning background assumptions with
others. In short, they will be good at generating plausible background
assumptions and at selecting the most appropriate from among them.</p>
<p>One might attempt to respond to this challenge by suggesting that
mindreading need not involve infinite observations at all because it can
be anchored in platitudes (Lewis, 1972). To illustrate, one platitude is
that being told something entails knowing it. If Maxi is told that his
chocolate is in the green cupboard, then we might infer that Maxi knows
his chocolate is in the green cupboard. Such platitudes are surely
useful in mindreading (Heider, 1958), but we will overestimate their
usefulness if we ignore context. Perhaps the speaker has deceptive
motives, or is joking, or simply being sarcastic. Perhaps Maxi does not
hear or correctly process the message. An indefinite range of contextual
factors can render the platitude incorrect. Appeal to platitudes appears
to solve the problem of infinite observations only if we ignore the role
of context in mindreading.</p>
<p>The problem of irrationality is the second challenge we face in
applying Davidson’s theory in practical mindreading. Similarly to
decision theory, Davidson’s theory applies only on condition that people
are ideally rational (and, perhaps even less plausibly, mostly
truthful). This condition requires not just flawless inferences: Maxi’s
every belief, desire and intention must at all times bear in exactly the
right way on his actions.<a href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> Failure of this condition would lead
to the conclusion that no humans, nor any other finite animals, have any
mental states at all—and our bounded rationality implies, of course,
that this condition does fail.<a href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref8" role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a> A model of how people
attribute mental states must allow that people are rational only within
limits. Davidson suggested that his theory can be saved only by adopting
the formal device that it should apply to parts of people’s minds within
which the rationality assumption could hold.<a href="#fn9"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a>
While other strategies are conceivable (for example, practical
mindreaders will simply ignore some of the things people do), any
strategy involves deciding where exactly to hold on to a rationality
assumption. To illustrate, if Maxi’s preferences fail to exhibit
transitivity we might select between different possibilities about which
are his ‘true’ preferences and which decision reflects a ‘mistake’. This
selection cannot, of course, be made on the basis of what is rational.
What makes for better or worse selections will depend on practical
considerations like the mindreader’s culture, as there are likely to be
advantages in agreeing with others around us on which mental states
someone has. This is a second reason why we cannot think of better
mindreading as simply being more accurate in identifying mental states.
Because there are many ways you could compensate for irrationality,
there are many ascriptions of mental states which will all count as
equally accurate. But in practice, people around you are unlikely to
recognize you as a competent mindreader unless you agree with them about
what Maxi’s mental states are, and the ability to agree with them is
what underwrites mindreading’s utility, even when mindreading alone.</p>
<p>To conclude this section, the problems of infinite observations and
irrationality complement each other as one concerns a limit on
mindreaders (they are finite) and the other a limit on the mindreader’s
targets (they are imperfectly rational). Both problems motivate
rejecting the otherwise attractively simple idea that better mindreading
is merely a matter of more accurately identifying mental states.<a
href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a> Instead, we must recognize that
using mindreading concepts effectively involves identifying assumptions
that are plausible and selecting those that are appropriate in a given
context. What makes assumptions plausible and appropriate is not
something internal to mindreading but is a consequence of what seems
plausible and appropriate to people, who of course include both
mindreaders and mindreading targets. In this respect, mindreading is not
entirely unlike public gift-giving. Success requires other people being
disposed to recognise that the gift—or mental state ascription—was
appropriate. Ultimately, then, an individual is successful at
mindreading if they ascribe states, predict behaviours, assign
responsibility, and so on in just the way that would occur if they were
involved in a joint mindreading activity with others around them.</p>
<h1 id="developing-the-theory">Developing the theory </h1>
<p>As described in the <em>Outline</em> section, concepts and rules are
unlikely to be sufficient for mindreading because there may be multiple
plausible responses even in simple cases. For example, even carefully
crafted false belief tasks appear to be a test of whether someone’s
intuitions, and their confidence in them, go well beyond anything
established by mental state concepts, general principles for their
application, and the available evidence in this particular
situation.</p>
<p>To see the extent of this challenge we need a richer example than
classic false belief tasks, and so we start by developing the problem of
mindreading other people’s thoughts and feelings through the example of
gift-giving. Tulip, the head of department, is delighted with the
tickets to the opera that her staff bought for her 50<sup>th</sup>
birthday. When Bruno, Tulip’s secretary, was tasked with organising the
gift a few ideas had sprung to mind, though on reflection some seemed
better than others. Although Tulip isn’t known as an opera buff, it felt
like the kind of thing she would like, and her partner confirmed that
she didn’t already have tickets. Moreover, it’s the kind of thing she
would be happy for everyone to know that she likes. Bruno was confident
Tulip would have liked a wine-tasting class even more, but highlighting
her liking for alcohol felt potentially awkward, especially in an office
where some colleagues do not drink.</p>
<p>This example illustrates that beneath the surface of the everyday
activity of gift-giving lies considerable complexity. Success requires
abductive “best guesses” about potentially appropriate gifts, which take
account of the characteristics of the recipient and their context.
Selection among these possibilities that present themselves involves
consideration of reasonableness, normativity, and reflexive awareness of
others, as well as accommodating particular facts (such as whether the
recipient already has the present). In short, selecting a gift draws
upon a rich web of information, sources of structure, and constraint, it
is essentially relational (involving the giver, the receiver, and
audience), and reaches both forwards and backwards in time to take
account of relevant history and anticipate future consequences. From
everyday experience we might add that it is also something that some
people seem distinctly better at than others.</p>
<p>Our contention is that gift-giving illustrates key challenges
inherent in many instances of mindreading. In common with longstanding
views, mindreading involves the generation and selection of candidate
thoughts or feelings for the target. In contrast with most existing
views, it suggests that the success of mindreading should be judged by
the extent to which it accords with “what people would think” is
plausible and appropriate. It even implies that someone mindreading
alone is nevertheless attempting to reason from the perspective of a
group of people, which is a form of collective reasoning (e.g.,
Bacharach, 2006; Chater et al., 2022; Schelling, 1960). In what follows
we aim to show that these insights motivate a new theory, assimilate a
wide range of disparate empirical evidence, and generate productive
directions for new research on how social understanding varies between
individuals and between groups.</p>
<p><strong>Analogy with modal thinking</strong></p>
<p>The challenge of generating useful answers from a large and
ill-defined problem space is widely recognised outside of the literature
on mindreading. For example, Phillips et al. (2021) addressed the puzzle
of “what comes to mind” during modal thinking about what is possible,
but potentially not actual. They note that previous literature
consistently “…proposes that we generate the ’alternative possibilities’
fundamental to modal cognition by (i) delimiting a task-relevant
partition within the vast space of conceivable possibilities, (ii)
considering a smaller subset of particular possibilities within the
relevant part of that partition, and then (iii)<a href="#fn11"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11" role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a>
ordering or evaluating them in task-relevant ways to inform our final
modal judgments” (p1027). For example, faced with the task of
identifying something for dinner after a disabling trip to the dentist
(e.g., Morris et al., 2021), people might (i) form a task-relevant
partition of “dishes” (ruling out the much larger set of all inedible
things, and things that are edible but not dishes), (ii) generate a
smaller “consideration set” of possibilities based upon heuristics
including decontextualised value and frequency (iii) select from the
consideration set a dish that avoids elements that are hard or crunchy
and therefore unsuitable after a disabling trip to the dentist. We
believe the challenge of generating and selecting possibilities in modal
thinking is a model for the challenge of generating and selecting mental
state ascriptions in mindreading , but also that mindreading requires
distinctive solutions to these challenges that are enlightening about
how mindreading is possible and why it might vary between people.</p>
<h2 id="mapping-the-analogy-to-mindreading.">Mapping the analogy to
mindreading.</h2>
<p>As already noted, it is often assumed that, for someone with the
right concepts and rules, mindreading is a matter of inferring from
observed behaviour what people think, feel and intend, much as you might
infer from texture and rise what is happening inside a loaf. As we noted
in <em>Foundations,</em> making such inferences in mindreading would
require choosing which of indefinitely many possible background
assumptions to make and selecting one among many possible ways of
repairing irrationality. The range of possible background assumptions
and repair strategies therefore generates a puzzle: How are we so
remarkably good at having clear intuitions about what someone else is
thinking, feeling, or intending, with high confidence and in agreement
with others? Any adequate account of mindreading must explain how these
difficulties are overcome.<a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref12" role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a> In an analogous way to
modal thinking we propose that having such intuitions depends on (i)
“partitioning” with rule-based constraints, (ii) generating a
“consideration set” of plausible possibilities by narrowing down the
possible range of thoughts, feelings, or intentions another is having,
and (iii) selecting the most appropriate answer from the consideration
set.</p>
<p><strong>(i) Partitioning</strong><em>.</em> Mindreading affords many
opportunities for using rules to partition the indefinitely large space
of possible mental states. For example, since <em>Anna Karenina</em> was
both written and set in late 19<sup>th</sup> century Russia, Anna could
never have views about such things as global warming or smartphones, or
anything else that was not known at the time. Equally, Steve Jobs’
koumpounophobia provides a rule-based limit on the space of possible
desires that could be ascribed to him. However, while partitioning in
this way clearly reduces the possibilities, as for modal reasoning, the
space of possible answers will often remain large, leaving a major
challenge for steps (ii) and (iii), which cannot be addressed using
rules.</p>
<p><strong>(ii) A consideration set of plausible possibilities.</strong>
Step two in the model of modal reasoning uses heuristics including
decontextualised value and frequency as a basis for generating a
consideration set of plausible possibilities. These heuristics are
unlikely to be helpful for mindreading because they are insensitive to
context and reflect only the person’s individual interests and
experiences. What is needed is some heuristic basis on which “what comes
to mind” could be conditional on context and the collective interests
and experiences of people, not individuals.</p>
<p>To address this, we take inspiration from analysis of related
challenges that arise when people interact for communicating and acting
together. An influential suggestion is that interacting people address
these challenges by aligning their actions, and the mental
representations and neural processes that govern them. For example,
during a discourse, participants make rapid decisions about the
linguistic forms they are hearing and producing, based on perceptual
input that only partially constrains choices. Many accounts suggest that
participants solve this problem through alignment. Over repeated
conversational turns, discourse participants increasingly converge in
their phonology, word selection, syntax, and meaning representations
(e.g., Galotti &amp; Frith, 2013; Pickering &amp; Garrod, 2004). So
although on a given turn a speaker might have used many possible
linguistic forms to express their meaning, they are more likely to
repeat ones that have already featured in the discourse. These
alignments simplify the tasks of communicators, by making the same
(aligned) representations more available than logically possible
alternatives.<a href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a> Importantly, interactive alignment
does not entail mindreading, or other inferential processes, but is
thought instead to depend upon “low-level” priming mechanisms at
multiple levels of processing (e.g., Pickering &amp; Garrod, 2004).</p>
<p>Such alignments have been studied at timescales from milliseconds to
minutes, focussing on temporary alignments between participants in a
discrete interaction that are dispensed with at the end of the
interaction. These are the wrong properties for our purposes. Firstly,
it is unlikely that the alignment that is possible within a single
interaction would be sufficient to bridge the large gap between generic
information from scripts and schemas and the ascription of highly
specific thoughts and feelings. Secondly, temporary interactive
alignment cannot, by definition, support mindreading outside
interactions, yet such mindreading is commonplace. We suggest that these
limitations could be addressed with a relatively modest extension of
theories of interactive alignment. Research on discourse processing
finds that comprehension influences different memory systems over
different timescales, with some effects only operating within the
limited bounds of short-term memory and others drawing upon and
influencing long-term memory (e.g., Rayner, Pollatsek, Ashby &amp;
Clifton, 2012). It is only a small step to suppose that alignment, too,
develops beyond specific interactions, creating longer-term,
asynchronous alignment. Such alignment means that in situations where
collective reasoning is relevant, individuals are primed, in a
context-sensitive manner, to think similar things in similar ways.</p>
<p>In sum, Morris et al. (2021) suggest that responses “come to mind”
for modal reasoning according to their frequency and “cached value”
derived from the reasoner’s experience. We suggest that responses “come
to mind” for mindreading according to their salience derived from the
mindreader’s past interactive alignment. We propose that such
asynchronous alignment is critical for explaining how people are in a
position to generate plausible candidates for what another person might
be thinking or feeling.</p>
<h3
id="iii-selecting-an-appropriate-answer-from-the-consideration-set-of-plausible-mental-states.">(iii)
Selecting an appropriate answer from the consideration set of plausible
mental states.</h3>
<p>Models of modal reasoning commonly propose that plausible candidate
responses are evaluated according to task-specific constraints (such as
needing to avoid hard or crunchy food) to select a response (Phillips et
al., 2021). For mindreading the example of gift-buying illustrates the
considerations that guide the selection of an appropriate thought or
feeling. These include normative rules about what is morally and
socially appropriate, and whether the ascription seems reasonable in
light of other things we know about what the person thinks, wants and
feels, and other aspects of their situation, time, or circumstances.
Considerations are at least sometimes reflexive, such that what I think
someone else will want should depend, in part, on their knowing that I
or others might find out.</p>
<p>Importantly, such consideration of “appropriateness” is essentially
social. What it means to pick the most appropriate possible mental state
may just be to pick the one to which a group of people – including the
mindreader and the target of the mental state ascription - might also
agree, given sufficient time to discuss it. This is why an important
determiner of mindreading success will be shared criteria of
appropriateness, shared norms and therefore shared background and
experience with the targets of mindreading and everyone else
involved.</p>
<h2
id="conclusion-mindreading-is-an-asynchronous-joint-activity-m-a-j-a">Conclusion:
Mindreading is an asynchronous joint activity (M-A-J-A<a href="#fn14"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a>)</h2>
<p>We propose that mindreading involves partitioning, generation of
plausible candidate thoughts and feelings for the mindreading target,
and selection of the most appropriate from among this set. Mindreading
is “asynchronous” insofar as the criteria of plausibility and
appropriateness depend upon a background that exists prior to the
current mindreading episode. This is true whether the mindreader is a
participant or a spectator in a current social interaction, or if they
are alone in the dark trying to imagine why their friend has not called,
or whether Tolstoy was consistent in his depiction of Karenin’s
indifference to his wife’s mental life. Mindreading is nevertheless a
“joint activity” because the criteria of plausibility and
appropriateness are essentially joint criteria. These criteria are not
merely socially learned. Rather, they are constituted by the intuitions
and principles with which groups of mindreaders will tend to agree, and
to which individuals hold themselves in order to be considered rational
and reasonable.</p>
<p><img src="/public/img/articles/apperly2025_mindreading/image1.png" style="width:6.27014in;height:6.70486in"
alt="A diagram of a process AI-generated content may be incorrect." /></p>
<p><em>Figure 1. Schematic model of the process of generation and
selection of mindreading inferences. (a) Rule-based constraints form a
partition of possible mental states from the field of all available
mental states. (b) Plausible candidates are generated by integrating
inputs about the target and context with background information that has
been structured through interactive social experience. Variation in
plausibility is represented by the height of the blue bars. (c) The most
appropriate candidate(s) is selected by integrating inputs about the
target and context with considerations of normativity, morality, and
reasonableness derived from prior social experience. The selected mental
state (red bar) may not have been the most plausible at step (b). The
selections may become additional inputs to the generation process (d),
resulting in further cycles of generation and selection. This ultimately
leads to an appropriate candidate being selected as the mindreading
inference (e).</em></p>
<h1 id="comparison-with-other-accounts">Comparison with other accounts
</h1>
<p>The present account builds upon a rich history of over forty years of
theories about the nature of mindreading by philosophers and
psychologists. In this section we aim to cast light on the current
proposals by identifying crucial points of similarity and contrast with
existing accounts. The lens of early development has led many accounts
to focus upon the basic structural necessities for mindreading. This
leads them to neglect or underestimate the importance of questions about
<em>how</em> we ascribe mental states that are plausible and
appropriate, and severely limits their capacity to explain developmental
continuity beyond early childhood or continuing variation in mindreading
in adults.</p>
<h2 id="tomm-sp">ToMM-SP</h2>
<p>A longstanding account proposes that a “Theory of Mind Module”
generates possible belief contents while a “Selection Processor” selects
between them (e.g., Leslie, Friedman &amp; German, 2004). We do not
endorse this modular account, but we gladly acknowledge that our
proposal that mindreading involves processes of generation and selection
takes inspiration from this and other work that distinguishes between
generation and selection during reasoning and decision-making (e.g.,
Kahneman, 2003; Morris et al., 2021). However, Leslie et al.’s account
suffers from two essential problems that relate to the challenges
addressed in the present work. First, the ToMM-SP model provides no
explanation for how the Theory of Mind Module generates possible belief
contents. This should not be surprising since a modular architecture is
thought by many to be incompatible with the abductive reasoning required
for mental state ascription (Fodor, 2001). Second, Leslie et al.’s
account provides no explanation for how the Selection Processor decides
which belief to inhibit and which to select (e.g., Apperly, 2010;
Doherty, 2008). Leslie, Friedman, and German (2004) hint at the
challenge when they suggest that “In reaching its decisions, [the
Selection Processor] accesses a learned database of circumstances
relevant to selecting between candidate beliefs”. However, because their
focus is on the basic structural necessities for mindreading they do not
consider the challenges in understanding how such a database develops or
how it supports such decisions. From the current perspective the ToMM-SP
account addresses much of the challenge of mindreading with a promise
that a solution exists somewhere else.</p>
<h2 id="development-of-structures-and-concepts">Development of
structures and concepts</h2>
<p>Whereas the ToMM-SP account assumes that the fundamental structures
and concepts for mindreading are innate in a domain-specific module,
other influential accounts propose that these are acquired during early
development. For example, Perner and colleagues emphasise the
acquisition of cognitive structures for metarepresentation (Perner,
1991) or, more recently, for the abstract representation of perspective
(Doherty &amp; Perner, 2020). We acknowledge, of course, that a full
account of mindreading requires a theory of the cognitive structures
involved. However, such structures are empty vehicles for mindreading;
necessary for representing mental states but providing no account of how
the mindreader comes to ascribe any particular mental state to anyone.
In a related programme of work, Wellman and Gopnik (e.g., Gopnik &amp;
Wellman, 1992) have led the way in studying children’s acquisition of
fundamental mindreading concepts, of perception, knowledge, belief,
desire, intention and the like (e.g., Gopnik &amp; Meltzoff, 1997;
Wellman, 2014). On one reading these concepts play an analogous role to
the structures emphasised by Perner and colleagues, providing the
necessary vehicles for mindreading but no account of their use. On
another reading, concepts are intended to specify the rules for the use
of mindreading – an approach sometimes referred to as “theory-theory”
(Gopnik &amp; Wellman, 1992, Gopnik &amp; Meltzoff, 1997). However, for
reasons described above they fall far short of achieving that objective
and there are reasons to doubt that they could if they tried. Research
on the development of structures and concepts can complement but cannot
replace the idea that mindreading is an asynchronous joint activity.</p>
<h2 id="mindreading-as-simulation">Mindreading as simulation</h2>
<p>The essential idea behind simulation accounts is that the mindreader
need not have an exhaustively specified set of rules for mindreading and
can instead use their own mind as a model with which to simulate the
functional processes of the target’s mind (e.g., Goldman, 2006; Harris,
1992). For this reason, it has been suggested that simulation might
avoid the problems of intractable processing described above (Heal,
1996). Accounts typically appeal to “relevant similarity” in biology and
experience which ensures that any one brain may serve as the basis for
simulating any other, given appropriately similar starting states.
However, accounts never explain how biology or experience underwrites
the kinds of similarity that are necessary. For this reason, simulation
accounts beg the question which should be at the centre of any account
of mindreading: how is it that anyone is ever in the position to
mindread?<a href="#fn15" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a></p>
<p><strong>Scripts, Schemas and Intuitive Models</strong></p>
<p>Research in cognitive and social psychology suggests that
representations of events, situations, and people are organised into
scripts, schemas, and stereotypes (e.g., Cantor et al., 1982; Fiske
&amp; Taylor, 1984; Gilbert, 1998; Schank &amp; Abelson, 1977). These
ensure that people in a restaurant (to pick a famous example) will share
certain expectations about seating, ordering, eating etc., enabling
co-ordination between waiters, sommeliers, and diners. Likewise, there
is evidence that people have an intuitive model of the structure of
personality traits (a “mindspace”), the accuracy of which is related to
their success on advanced mindreading tasks (e.g., Conway et al., 2019;
Long et al., 2022). Each of these knowledge structures offers schematic,
generalizable information about a situation, event, or person that
surely helps with forming a consideration set of plausible possibilities
for what someone is thinking. However, this utility is both problematic
and limited. It is problematic because over-reliance on generic
information is likely to be a source of systematic bias in mindreading
(Spaulding, 2018), just as it is in a wide range of other social
judgements (e.g., Fiske, 1993). It is limited because scripts, schemas,
stereotypes, and other intuitive models are insufficient to explain how
we are in a position to go beyond generic information to make flexible,
fine-grained, ad-hoc inferences in a particular instance.</p>
<p><strong>Mindreading Accuracy</strong></p>
<p>The challenge of mindreading has often been framed in terms of the
“unobservability” of mental states that are presumed to exist in the
head of the target of mindreading (e.g., Goldman, 2006; Gopnik &amp;
Wellman, 1992; Johnson, 2000; Leslie., 1987; Whiten, 1996). This has
motivated attempts to access the “ground truth” of what mindreading
targets think and feel by asking them to report on these mental states,
and it motivates the idea that the objective of mindreading is accurate
identification of those unobservable mental states (e.g., Long et al.,
2022; Long, Catmur &amp; Bird, 2024). These views face challenges both
in theory and in practice.</p>
<p>The idea that people have privileged and accurate access to their own
thoughts has a long and contentious history (Locke, 1689; Russell, 1917;
Stich, 1983; Boghossian, 1989; Dretske, 1994; Shoemaker, 1994; McGeer,
1996; Moran, 2001; Bar-On, 2004). It may even be that such self-reports
entail the application of interpretive mindreading to oneself (e.g.,
Carruthers, 2011). Therefore, it is far from obvious that self-reported
mental states are a source of ground-truth against which the accuracy of
mindreading can be evaluated. Suppose, however, that self-reported
mental states were a potential source of ground-truth. Even then,
accounts of mental state ascription suggest that accurate identification
of these states by mindreaders is not possible in practice, and so
cannot be a criterion for mindreading success (see
<em>Foundations</em>).</p>
<p>In practice, a long tradition of research on “empathic accuracy” has
nonetheless assessed mindreaders’ accuracy against targets’
self-reports. With origins in research on therapeutic interactions Ickes
and colleagues (e.g., Ickes et al., 1986; Ickes, 1993; Marangoni et al.,
1995) had targets watch a recording of themselves during a clinical
interview or an informal interaction and report post hoc on the thoughts
and feelings they were experiencing. However, this programme of work
finds only limited evidence for stable individual differences in
empathic accuracy when participants attempt to infer those thoughts and
feelings (Ickes et al., 2000). Accurate judgement of emotional valence
depends upon the target themselves demonstrating high emotional
expressivity (Zaki et al., 2008), and empathic accuracy is often
better-explained via relational factors such as whether (and how well)
the target and perceiver are known to each other, rather than the
mindreading abilities of participants (e.g., Zaki et al., 2009).</p>
<p><strong>Mindshaping</strong></p>
<p>Zawidzki (2013) claims that the success of human communication and
coordination is founded in the interlocking products of social
experience. Social experience shapes people’s minds in ways that make
them mutually interpretable and entitles individuals to reasonable
expectations about others while also making them subject to the same
reasonable expectations themselves. While Zawidzki’s (2013) objectives
are not limited to theorising about mindreading<a href="#fn16"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref16" role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a>
there is a clear relationship with the present account. Alignment is a
two-way process, and so our proposal that successful mindreading depends
on asynchronous alignment implies that the criteria for successful
mindreading serve a regulatory as well as a descriptive function,
providing criteria to which the target of mindreading should be holding
themselves. Consistent with Zawidzki (2013), according to the M-A-J-A
account we not only mindread others but also expect everyone (including
ourselves) to be held accountable to mindreading interpretations of
their own thoughts, feelings, and behaviour. This shared expectation
provides further foundation for the effectiveness of socially agreed
interpretive principles.</p>
<h2 id="formal-models-of-mindreading">Formal models of mindreading</h2>
<p>There have been recent advances in modelling mindreading using formal
methods. For example, Bayesian models conceptualise intuitive
understanding of behaviour as a “naive utility calculus” according to
which people act rationally to maximise their expected rewards (e.g.,
Baker et al., 2017; Jara-Ettinger et al., 2016). Within a simple
simulated world, such models can predict action given an agent’s desires
and beliefs and infer the most likely beliefs and desires from
observation of behaviour. They yield results that accord impressively
well with the judgements of children and adults. However, success for
“Bayesian ToM” models has only been demonstrated for simple scenarios
that maintain tractable reasoning by creating a highly constrained toy
world of possible beliefs and desires, and as noted by Stuhlmuller and
Goodman (2014) <em>“At the algorithmic level, it seems likely that exact
inference will not scale to models with realistic state spaces.”</em>
This illustrates that the problems of infinite observations and
rationality raised in <em>Foundations</em> also arise for these newer
formal models. Clearly these and analogous formal models (e.g.,
Veissiere et al., 2019) offer exciting prospects for future advances by
specifying the general reasoning principles over mindreading concepts.
Stuhlmuller and Goodman suggest that there is an outstanding question of
understanding how humans cope with situations that cannot be modelled
with an exact inference algorithm. We believe this is directly aligned
with the M-A-J-A account’s objective of understanding how humans make
mindreading inferences that are plausible and appropriate without
artificial constraints on the state space of possible mental states.</p>
<h2 id="mindreading-is-3rd-person-and-spectatorial">Mindreading is 3rd
person and spectatorial</h2>
<p>An influential critique proposes that social abilities essentially
involve interaction with others (e.g., Redcay &amp; Schilbach, 2019;
Schilbach et al, 2013). This view paints mindreading as non-interactive,
“third-person”, and “spectatorial”, and therefore a mis-characterisation
of our social abilities. We suggest that a less polarised perspective
may be useful. We take it as a given that many social abilities do not
require mindreading. Equally, it is clear that mindreading is something
that people do, that it serves valuable functions, and stands in need of
explanation. Moreover, while mindreading surely occurs during
interactions it just as surely occurs outside of them. Therefore, an
account of mindreading cannot depend upon the involvement of the
mindreader in a current interaction with another person. There is
potential for rapprochement, however, because the account developed here
<em>does</em> suggest that mindreading is essentially a joint activity,
albeit one where the “joint” aspects are often asynchronous because they
are the products of past interactions and anticipate future social
evaluation.</p>
<h2 id="mindreading-is-socially-constructed">Mindreading is socially
constructed</h2>
<p>The M-A-J-A account has clear affinities with a variety of claims
about the social construction of mindreading. It is also informative to
identify points of divergence. A social constructivist perspective is
prominent in developmental research (e.g., Carpendale &amp; Lewis, 2004;
Fernyhough, 2008; Meins, 2013; Nelson, 1998; Tomasello, 2018), inspired
by theoretical ideas from Vygotsky (1931/1997) and Mead (1934), and
drawing upon evidence that early mindreading is influenced by social
experience with parents and siblings (for meta-analysis see Devine &amp;
Hughes, 2018), and linguistic experience, perhaps especially with
communicative and pragmatic aspects of language (e.g., Astingon &amp;
Baird, 2005). Guided by the lens of early development these approaches
have emphasised the social construction of basic mindreading concepts
and set themselves in contrast to nativist accounts (e.g., Leslie et
al., 2004) or constructivist accounts that emphasise individual
discovery and theory-building (e.g., Gopnik &amp; Meltzoff, 1997;
Wellman, 2014). However, our account is agnostic on this question about
early development: mindreading concepts could be innate, individually or
socially constructed, or indeed the emphasis on the acquisition of
mindreading concepts could be misplaced. There still remains the
question of how people put these abilities to practical use, and this is
the focus of our account. This has not typically been a focus of social
constructivist accounts of early development, even if they might
naturally be extended for this purpose.</p>
<p>Beyond the focus on early development, researchers from a range of
disciplines have suggested that mindreading might be influenced or even
constituted by “narrative practice” that is essentially socio-cultural
in nature (e.g., Bruner, 1990; Hutto 2012; Nelson. 1998) and might be
affected by experience with reading character-rich fiction (Zunshine,
2006). Narratives (whether oral or written) are very rich forms,
conveying information about people and situations both directly, and
more indirectly in ways analogous to scripts and schemas. Like
mindreading, storytelling involves turning a potentially infinite space
of possibilities into a finite one. For these general reasons narrative
experience is a plausible contributor to mindreading, and it is
plausible that good storytellers are also good mindreaders. However, a
particularly distinctive idea is that folk psychological narratives
“...make explicit mention of how mental states ….. figure in the lives,
history, and larger projects of their owners” (Hutto, 2009, p11), and
that exposure to such narratives, and experience with generating such
narratives of one’s own, provides the crucial training for understanding
how mental states work together in predictions, explanations, and
justifications of words and deeds. If this idea is understood in terms
of different narrative forms this would suggest that different forms of
folk psychological narrative are relevant inputs for mindreading but are
limited because they deal only in generalities in a similar way to
scripts and schemas. A yet more productive reading of this idea is that
narrative communication may be a critical forum for learning the soft
constraints on how mindreading is used to make sense of oneself and
others, and to test one’s own application of those constraints is
aligned with that of the critical arbiters: other people.</p>
<h2 id="two-systems-accounts">“Two-systems” accounts</h2>
<p>Two of us (Apperly &amp; Butterfill, 2009; Butterfill &amp; Apperly,
2013) have argued that mindreading might be achieved via two types of
process that make complementary trade-offs between flexibility and
efficiency, in common with longstanding proposals in many other areas of
cognition. The account developed here is wholly independent of the
success or otherwise of a two-systems approach to mindreading.</p>
<p>The M-A-J-A accont shares some of the same motivating concerns. Part
of the motivation for a two-systems account is that processing
“belief-like states” that are simpler than beliefs provides a way of
avoiding the potentially intractable processing described earlier, if
only for the limited range of cases where belief-like states will
suffice. However, our two-systems account has not fully addressed the
challenge of explaining how people manage to ascribe full-blown beliefs.
To that extent the present proposals could be viewed as addressing a
significant omission in the two-systems account. Importantly, however,
this is also a significant omission from every alternative theory,
meaning that the present critique and proposals are relevant
irrespective of one’s preference among current theories of
mindreading.</p>
<h1
id="applying-the-theory-to-the-challenge-of-understanding-individual-differences-in-mindreading">Applying
the theory to the challenge of understanding individual differences in
mindreading</h1>
<p>Thus far our account has been motivated by the observation that
existing theories of mindreading fail to explain how mindreading
concepts can be used in practice. We now turn to variability in
mindreading. The motivating intuitions here are that some people are
more socially able than others, that their social abilities may vary
between contexts (e.g., home versus the workplace), and that variation
in mindreading has something to do with this. These intuitions are
validated by impressive advances in measurement of individual
differences in mindreading. The need for new theory is motivated by the
surprising failure of existing theories to explain how such individual
differences are possible. We review core phenomena from recent research
and highlight two important phenomena: longitudinal stability, whereby
individual differences in mindreading in early childhood are stable over
time and predict later social abilities; and the existence of individual
differences in mindreading into adulthood. We then explain why these
phenomena are poorly accounted for by existing theories, before
examining how our new account can help.</p>
<h2 id="core-methods-and-phenomena">Core methods and phenomena</h2>
<p>Measurement of individual differences requires mindreading tasks on
which performance will vary reliably in a given age range. It has been
found that tasks originally devised to test for young children’s
possession of mindreading concepts - such as the false belief task - can
be aggregated into batteries that provide reliable measures of
individual differences in young children. Individual differences in
performance on false-belief task batteries are psychometrically robust:
they are explained by a single latent factor (e.g., Hughes, Devine &amp;
Wang, 2018), show test-retest reliability (e.g., Hughes et al., 2000),
and exhibit rank-order stability over time (e.g., Devine &amp; Hughes,
2019). They are consequential in that they predict later social
adjustment (e.g., Lecce &amp; Devine, 2021). Unsurprisingly, since
standard false belief tasks were specifically devised to be sensitive
tests of young children’s concept possession, these tasks also
demonstrate ceiling effects beyond age 6. However, the presence of
ceiling effects in false belief task performance (as well as measures of
desire understanding or second-order false belief understanding) do not
necessarily preclude persisting individual differences in mindreading
beyond early childhood. To overcome ceiling effects researchers have
devised mindreading tasks that involve more subtle or complicated uses
of beliefs, desires, and intentions. For example, the Strange Stories
task (White et al., 2008; Happé, 1994) presents children with short
stories and the Silent Film task (Devine et al., 2013) presents children
with short film excerpts, and tests their understanding of the depicted
social scenarios that might involve misunderstandings, lies, and
double-bluffs. The correct answer is an interpretation determined by the
researchers’ own judgement, by the majority view of a reference sample
of participants, or some combination of these criteria (Yeung et al.,
2023). Such tasks successfully raise the ceiling for performance and
measure reliable variance into adolescence (Devine, Kovatchev, Grumley
Traynor, Smith &amp; Lee, 2023).</p>
<p>These tasks are not only harder. Numerous studies have demonstrated
clear gains in mindreading performance across middle childhood and
adolescence (e.g., Devine &amp; Hughes, 2013; Dumontheil et al., 2010;
Osterhaus et al., 2016; Meinhardt-Injac et al., 2020). These gains are
difficult to explain in terms of “new mindreading concepts” but
nonetheless appear specifically social because they are not explained by
improved performance in language ability or executive function (e.g.,
Devine &amp; Hughes, 2016; Lecce et al., 2017).</p>
<p>Alongside evidence of continued growth in mindreading performance,
there are marked individual differences in performance even within
narrow age ranges (e.g., Devine et al., 2023). Rank-order stability in
mindreading performance on a given task challenges the idea that
individual differences in performance simply capture temporary
differences in children’s mastery of mental concepts or differences
arising from task performance factors (e.g., Hughes &amp; Devine, 2015).
Instead, measures like the false belief task appear to provide an early
marker of persistent individual differences in mindreading, measured
within a narrow window of sensitivity for a given task (Devine, 2021).
Moreover, individual differences in performance exhibit longitudinal
stability over time (e.g., Banerjee et al., 2011; Lecce et al., 2024).
Longitudinal rank-order stability in performance across different
age-appropriate measures (i.e. heterotypic stability) suggests that
different mindreading tasks might tap into individual differences in the
same underlying trait at different points in development (e.g., Devine
et al., 2016).</p>
<p>Individual differences in mindreading are consequential because they
are linked with meaningful social outcomes. For example, over-and-above
language ability, executive function and social motivation, individual
differences in mindreading in middle childhood and adolescence are
associated with superior social skills (e.g., Ronchi et al., 2020;
Devine &amp; Apperly, 2022; Tamnes et al., 2018). Furthermore, in line
with evidence from early childhood about the influence of social
experience on young children’s mindreading (e.g., Devine &amp; Hughes,
2018), children in classrooms where teachers frequently use mental state
language perform better on tests of mindreading than other children
(Lecce et al., 2022). In summary, individual differences in mindreading
from early childhood to adolescence appear to be persistent, robust,
specific, and consequential.</p>
<p>There is evidence that individual differences in mindreading persist
beyond adolescence into adulthood. In a recent systematic review Yeung
et al. (2024) identified 273 studies that used 75 different measures of
mindreading with adults. Yeung et al. also argue that current evidence
falls short of meeting strong criteria for reliable and valid
measurement, in contrast to what has been observed in children. However,
current literature provides reason to be optimistic that meaningful
individual differences in mindreading persist beyond adolescence, and
therefore have the potential to explain persistent individual
differences in social ability.</p>
<h3 id="explaining-longitudinal-stability">Explaining longitudinal
stability </h3>
<p>No existing account can adequately explain evidence that individual
differences in mindreading are stable over time. Differences in
processing capacity or social motivation have the potential – in
principle – to explain why some children may be faster than others to
pass mindreading tasks, and why differences in mindreading are
persistent over time. However, as noted above, processing capacity turns
out to be insufficient to explain why earlier mindreading predicts later
mindreading and social abilities because variation in mindreading
performance predicts social outcomes over and above performance on
measures of executive function and language ability (e.g., Devine et
al., 2016). Regarding social motivation, recent work suggests this, too,
only partially accounts for individual differences in mindreading and
social ability (Devine &amp; Apperly, 2021).</p>
<p>Accounts that focus on the structures and concepts necessary for
mindreading fail to explain longitudinal stability because mindreading
concepts and structures can only ever serve as enablers of social
ability, whereas what is needed is for mindreading to serve as a
mediator. To illustrate, let us suppose that social experience and
social motivation predict mindreading success because they help children
to acquire conceptual grasp of the difference between beliefs, desires,
and intentions, or between such mental states and other things such as
shadows (e.g., Estes, 1988; Wellman &amp; Estes, 1986), or help the
development of representational structures necessary for thinking about
mental states (e.g., Doherty &amp; Perner, 2020; Perner, 1991). This
would <em>enable</em> new ways of thinking about mental states. However,
concepts and structures are thought to be universally acquired by late
childhood. If all children acquire the same set of concepts and
structures for mindreading then concepts and structures cannot explain
why mindreading ability continues to vary, or why such variance predicts
later social ability.</p>
<p>In contrast the Mindreading as Asynchronous Joint Activity (M-A-J-A)
account shows how the effective use of mindreading can continue to vary.
This means that it can be a <em>mediator</em>, that continues to be
affected by social experience, social motivation, and other influences,
and has unique new influences on social ability. Put simply, the M-A-J-A
account has the right form to explain longitudinal stability in
mindreading, whereas conceptual accounts do not.</p>
<p><strong>New predictions.</strong></p>
<p>Providing a viable explanation of longitudinal stability yields new
and distinctive predictions regarding the measurement of early
mindreading abilities. One common practice is to measure early
mindreading according to a “scale” ranging from early-acquired to
later-acquired concepts. This accords well with conceptual accounts, and
as demonstrated by Wellman and colleagues (e.g., Wellman &amp; Liu,
2004; Wellman, Fang &amp; Peterson, 2011) scales of this kind not only
show an age-related increase in the number of concepts present, but also
a reliable order of emergence, at least within a given culture. A second
common practice measures individual differences on batteries of
different instantiations of the same task - most often false belief
tasks – within a sensitive age range (e.g., Hughes &amp; Devine, 2015).
This accords poorly with conceptual accounts, which have no basis for
interpreting degrees of performance on tasks designed to operationalise
the same concept (Apperly, 2012), yet as reviewed above, performance on
such batteries shows stable and meaningful variability. Whereas these
two measurement approaches are often used interchangeably, we propose
that variation on such measures should instead be conceptualised on two
orthogonal dimensions (see Figure 2). The vertical dimension corresponds
to the number of mental state concepts that a child appears to
understand at a given point in time. The horizontal dimension
corresponds to the number of contexts (operationalised as the number of
tasks) in which a child can demonstrate appropriate use of a given
concept. To the extent that mindreading is a mediator and not merely an
enabler of later abilities a child’s score on the horizontal dimension
should be a better predictor of later mindreading and later social
ability, compared with their score on the vertical dimension.</p>
<p><img src="/public/img/articles/apperly2025_mindreading/image2.svg"
style="width:6.27014in;height:2.63889in" /></p>
<p><em>Figure 2. Visualisation of variation in early mindreading on two
orthogonal dimensions. The vertical dimension corresponds to the number
of concepts currently in a child’s repertoire (cf. Wellman &amp; Liu,
2004). The horizontal dimension corresponds to flexible exercise of a
given concept across different contexts (False belief a-e). For clarity
the latter is illustrated only for the example of false beliefs, but of
course any concept can be tested across multiple contexts, as
illustrated by the range of tasks that target each concept in the
existing literature.</em></p>
<p>The M-A-J-A account also yields distinctive new predictions about the
influence of social experience on mindreading by distinguishing between
generation of plausible mental states versus selection of the most
appropriate from among them. The account suggests that children’s
exposure to rich social and communicative interactions in which they
become aligned with others will influence their ability to generate
plausible possibilities when required to imagine what someone else is
thinking or feeling (c.f. Ensor &amp; Hughes, 2008; Meins et al., 2003).
It also suggests that children’s participation in joint folk
psychological activities - of negotiating how mental states feature in
reason-giving explanations about other people and oneself - will be a
particular influence on their ability to select the most appropriate
mental state from among plausible possibilities.</p>
<p>In summary, the M-A-J-A account has the right form to explain
longitudinal stability, is readily compatible with evidence of social
effects on mindreading over and above cognitive effects and leads to
novel predictions and recommendations for improved methods for future
work.</p>
<h3 id="explaining-lifespan-individual-differences">Explaining Lifespan
individual differences </h3>
<p>Since tests of core mindreading concepts are passed during childhood,
adolescents and adults cannot be expected to vary in their possession of
such core concepts. It has been suggested that adolescents and adults
continue to acquire more subtle or sophisticated mindreading concepts,
which may not reach a ceiling of sophistication in all adults (e.g.,
Wellman, 2014). However, no theory describing advanced mindreading
concepts has yet been articulated (e.g., Osterhaus &amp; Bosacki, 2022),
and it is unclear what new concepts are required for success on existing
“advanced” mindreading tasks.<a href="#fn17" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref17" role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a> At most such tasks
typically involve the combination or recursion of core concepts (e.g.,
an intention thwarted by ignorance; beliefs about beliefs), suggesting
that they may require greater processing capacity but not new concepts.
New mindreading concepts do not seem necessary to explain lifespan
individual differences in mindreading, nor are they likely to be
sufficient.</p>
<p>There is evidence from neuropsychology, dual-task interference, and
brain stimulation suggesting that adults’ successful mindreading depends
upon possessing the necessary capacity for working memory and cognitive
control (e.g., Apperly, 2010; Frith &amp; Frith, 2012; Gilead &amp;
Oschner, 2021; Happe et al., 2017). However, correlations between
mindreading performance and tests of working memory and cognitive
control are typically modest and are observed inconsistently (e.g.,
Qureshi et al., 2019; Ryskin et al., 2015), suggesting that these
capacities, while necessary, are not critically limiting for many adults
on many tasks. A potential exception is highly recursive mindreading,
which plausibly makes considerable demands on working memory. However,
recent evidence suggests that previous work has significantly
overestimated adults’ recursive mindreading capacity (Wilson et al.,
2023), suggesting that it is unlikely to be a major source of individual
differences. Overall, this limited role for processing capacity in
explaining individual differences accords with the intuition that
general cognitive ability is relevant but insufficient to explain
variation in social ability.</p>
<p>Finally, it seems very plausible that variation in social motivation
is a source of variation in both social ability in general and
mindreading in particular, and there is a small but growing body of
evidence consistent with this possibility (e.g., Contreras-Huerta et
al., 2020; Pomareda, Devine &amp; Apperly, 2024a). However, without an
account of how mindreading can vary in adults, there is no way of
explaining how it could be affected by variation in social
motivation.</p>
<p>In sum, despite much work, the current literature has made little
progress beyond the unsatisfactory conclusion that adults who score
higher on tests of mindreading are demonstrating greater mindreading
abilities. The M-A-J-A account addresses this challenge by providing
criteria for judging the quality of mindreading.</p>
<h2 id="what-counts-as-a-good-mindreading-answer">What counts as a
“good” mindreading answer?</h2>
<p>According to the M-A-J-A account, good mindreading is about agreement
with others around us, including - but not only - the target of
mindreading. To a first approximation a good interpretation is just what
a group of people would jointly conclude given adequate time to discuss
it. Discussion establishes consensus on relevant information about the
target and their situation, airs potential interpretations, and supports
the selection of the best interpretation in light of moral and normative
rules, context, and considerations of “reasonableness”. By the end all
discussants should acknowledge the quality of the agreed-upon
interpretation, even if it was not the one they would have reached
independently. It follows that a good mindreader is someone who can
simulate the results of such a group process.<a href="#fn18"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref18" role="doc-noteref"><sup>18</sup></a>
As described earlier, the M-A-J-A account suggests that such simulation
is dependent upon prior experience of interactive alignment that equips
the mindreader with the intuitions to generate a plausible set of
candidate mental states, and the shared norms and principles used to
select an appropriate mental state from that set.</p>
<p>The first approximation assumes that both the group of mindreaders
and the mindreading target are drawn from a similar population, so that
it is possible to establish consensus on what information is relevant,
what interpretations are plausible, and which is most appropriate.
However, it is clearly possible that differences in knowledge,
judgements of relevance, and what is moral, reasonable, or normatively
correct, could result in groups with different compositions coming to
different agreements, or to those agreements being invalid for the
target. It follows that a mindreader who is flexible enough to simulate
the interpretations of a range of groups and targets will be more
successful than one who cannot. With these conclusions it is possible to
address the challenge of measuring individual differences in
mindreading.</p>
<h2
id="measurement-of-individual-differences-across-the-lifespan-mindreading-interpretations">Measurement
of individual differences across the lifespan: mindreading
interpretations</h2>
<p>The M-A-J-A account takes the need for interpretation to be a central
feature of mindreading, rather than an unfortunate bug in existing
attempts to measure it (c.f. Long, Catmur &amp; Bird, 2024). A first
step forward would be for researchers to recognise interpretation as a
potential source of variation. Many existing tests of mindreading in
adults score responses in ways that confound the quality of
participants’ responses (i.e. their plausibility and appropriateness)
with the mere quantity of mental states mentioned in the response. Using
a coding scheme that separated these variables Pomareda et al. (2024b)
found independent variation in quality and quantity of mental state
descriptions in participants’ mindreading explanations, suggesting that
these are separate constructs with potentially distinctive roles in
predicting social ability.</p>
<p>Second, our analysis highlights the social character of criteria for
determining a good interpretation. This should make researchers think
carefully about whose interpretations are relevant and valid, who gets
to decide which interpretations are better, and whether the answers to
these questions are appropriate for a given research question. Suppose,
for illustration, that some mindreading stories were created and scored
by a straight, white, middle-class, middle-aged, British male academic
(the first author acknowledges these characteristics and also owns a
chef’s knife). We contend that these stories and scoring decisions are
unlikely to reflect all the ways in which a broader range of people use
mindreading to understand themselves and others, and that this measure
may turn out to be easier for people who are more like the researcher
than people who are less like him. We suspect that few researchers would
disagree. Yet frustratingly, this remains a contention because there is
remarkably little evidence on variation in mindreading interpretations,
or on the measurement fairness of mindreading tasks across different
populations (e.g., Devine &amp; Hughes, 2013; Hughes, Devine &amp; Wang,
2018). This reflects the limits of current theories, which do not
explain why these considerations might be important, and it reflects
limited use of standard psychometric considerations, (e.g., about the
“fairness” of measurement between different groups) when designing and
analysing studies of mindreading (Yeung et al., 2023).</p>
<p>What solutions are available? In relation to stimuli, it is feasible
to generate mindreading stimuli, questions, and answers systematically
to reflect the ways that mental states are used in reason-giving
explanations by a broad range of people – not just “experts” or
“authorities”. For example, in ongoing work, we have collaborated with
young adults with diverse demographic characteristics to create
personally meaningful narratives involving social situations that entail
mindreading. The creators, not the researchers, were allowed authority
over the correct mindreading interpretation of their narrative. Such
stimuli have higher face validity than narratives created by an
individual or homogenous group of researchers. They also open the way
for testing whether variation in the way that different people use
mindreading in reason-giving explanations is itself a source of
challenge for mindreaders, whether the ease with which mindreaders
address that challenge varies, and whether this depends on the diversity
of their social experience. This would capture the intuition that a
person may be a capable mindreader when “at home” in a familiar
environment, but less capable in less familiar environments. Moreover,
it suggests that a maximally capable mindreader is one who is able to
adapt their mindreading interpretations to the largest range of
different mindreading targets and social contexts.</p>
<p>In relation to evaluating performance, the M-A-J-A account suggests
that the ultimate criterion should be what the (possibly open-ended)
group of people relevant to the mindreader would agree was a good
mindreading interpretation. This means that there may sometimes be more
than one acceptable mindreading interpretation, that acceptability may
vary by context, and that different groups of people may agree on
different interpretations. Investigating these possibilities Yeung
(2024) asked participants to view scenes involving two protagonists (see
Figure 3), and to choose between the interpretations that participants
had given spontaneously in a prior study. Without additional context
participants showed clear preferences for some interpretations over
others, though more than one interpretation was often favoured for a
given scene. However, these preferences were influenced by additional
contextual information, and by participant characteristics (age of
participants in this instance). On the M-A-J-A account the more frequent
responses are all contenders for being “good” mindreading answers.
However, a good mindreader is one who can accommodate the systematic
variation in when any of these potentially good responses is plausible
and appropriate.</p>
<p><img src="/public/img/articles/apperly2025_mindreading/image3.svg"
style="width:6.27014in;height:3.59097in" /></p>
<p><em>Figure 3. Example stimuli and illustrative data from Yeung
(2024), study 5d. Twenty adult participants per condition judged the
response option that best fit the picture. Participants were either
given no further context, or prime sentence intended to bias them
towards response (a) or (b). Data presented here are from a “young”
adult sample aged 18-25. A further study found that these patterns
differed in younger versus older adults (aged 53-60). Whereas younger
adults’ spontaneous interpretations were most often consistent with
option (a), older adults’ interpretations were more often consistent
with option (c). A person who was sensitive to such variation would be a
more capable mindreader.</em></p>
<p>We want to emphasise that there is no single “correct” approach to
these challenges for empirical research. Sometimes it will be
appropriate to crowd-source opinion on the correct answers; sometimes
authorial intention will be valid; sometimes it will be appropriate to
ask a mindreading target what they are thinking or feeling. Design
choices should depend both on theory (i.e., the research question) and
on empirical considerations (i.e., the scoring criteria to capture
individual differences). However, we propose there is potential for
researchers to transform the field by using transparent and
hypothesis-informed decisions to guide selection and interpretation of
existing tasks and creation and scoring of new tasks, and robust
psychometric evaluation of how well the tasks serve their research
objectives.</p>
<h1 id="summary-and-conclusion">Summary and conclusion</h1>
<p>To date research on mindreading has failed to address fundamental
questions about how we ascribe thoughts and feelings to other people,
and why some people seem to be better at this than others. The M-A-J-A
account addresses these failures by rethinking what mindreading is and
what makes it possible.</p>
<p>We began by challenging the widespread assumption that successful
mindreading consists of identifying facts about mental states as
accurately as possible. While a target’s mental state can be identified
accurately in principle (Davidson, 1973; 1990), accurate identification
of mental states is a wildly unachievable objective in practice.
Instead, part of the art of competent mindreading is generating
plausible assumptions and selecting the most appropriate for a given
context. What is most appropriate will depend, among other things, on
which assumptions others around you would select, and what your aims in
mindreading are. A successful mindreader is one who generates and
selects those assumptions as if they were making their decisions as part
of a group of peers.</p>
<p>How are individuals able to simulate the conclusions of the
hypothetical decision-making of a group? In short, because they are
socialised. A history of interactive alignment leads members of a
population to have similar intuitions about what others might plausibly
be thinking or feeling in a particular situation, and to recognise
similar principles of normativity, appropriateness, and reasonableness.
To the extent that this is true, mindreading is not so much socially
constructed as socially constituted as an ongoing but asynchronous joint
activity.</p>
<p>The picture that emerges is one that still features mindreading
concepts and structures as necessary elements that enable mindreading
in-principle. But the practice of mindreading requires the significant
additions that we have described here. Besides giving conceptual
research on mindreading foundations that can bear its weight, we have
shown that our proposals have the capacity to explain extensive
empirical phenomena that are currently puzzling and provide a framework
for new empirical approaches to studying mindreading beyond the early
developmental period that has been the dominant focus for the past 40
years.</p>
<p><strong>References</strong></p>
<p>Abell, F., Happe, F., &amp; Frith, U. (2000). Do triangles play
tricks? Attribution of mental states to animated shapes in normal and
abnormal development. <em>Cognitive Development</em>, <em>15</em>(1),
1-16.</p>
<p><mark>Allais, M. (1979). The So-Called Allais Paradox and Rational
Decisions under Uncertainty. In M. Allais &amp; O. Hagen (Eds.),</mark>
<em>Expected Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox: Contemporary
Discussions of the Decisions under Uncertainty with Allais’
Rejoinder</em> <mark>(pp. 437–681). Dordrecht: Springer.</mark></p>
<p>Apperly, I.A. (2010). <em>Mindreaders: the cognitive basis of “theory
of mind”.</em> Hove: Psychology Press / Taylor &amp; Francis Group.</p>
<p>Apperly, I.A. (2012). What is “theory of mind”? Concepts, cognitive
processes and individual differences. <em>Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 65(5),</em> 825-839.</p>
<p>Apperly, I.A. &amp; Butterfill, S.A, (2009). Do humans have two
systems to track beliefs and belief-like states? <em>Psychological
Review, 116(4), 953-970.</em></p>
<p><em>Apperly, I.A. &amp; Wang, J.J. (2021). The Cognitive Basis of
Social Interaction in adulthood. In Ferguson, H.J., Brunsdon, V. &amp;
Bradford, E. (Eds.) The Cognitive Basis of Social Interaction Across the
Lifespan. OUP.</em></p>
<p>Astington, J. W., &amp; Baird, J. A. (Eds.). (2005). <em>Why language
matters for theory of mind</em>. Oxford University Press.</p>
<p>Aviezer, H., Trope, Y., &amp; Todorov, A. (2012). Holistic person
processing: faces with bodies tell the whole story. <em>Journal of
personality and social psychology</em>, <em>103</em>(1), 20.</p>
<p>Bacharach, M. (2006). <em>Beyond individual choice</em>. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.</p>
<p>Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Latham, P. E., Roepstorff, A., Rees, G.,
&amp; Frith, CD. (2010). Optimally interacting minds. <em>Science,
329,</em> 1081–1085.</p>
<p>Baker, C. L., Jara-Ettinger, J., Saxe, R., &amp; Tenenbaum, J. B.
(2017). Rational quantitative attribution of beliefs, desires and
percepts in human mentalizing. <em>Nature Human Behaviour</em>,
<em>1</em>(4), 0064.</p>
<p>Banerjee, R., Watling, D., &amp; Caputi, M. (2011). Peer relations
and the understanding of faux pas: Longitudinal evidence for
bidirectional associations. <em>Child development</em>, <em>82</em>(6),
1887-1905.</p>
<p>Bar-On, D. (2004). <em>Speaking My Mind: Expression and
Self-Knowledge</em>. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</p>
<p>Barrett, H. C. (2020). Towards a cognitive science of the human:
Cross-cultural approaches and their urgency. <em>Trends in cognitive
sciences</em>, <em>24</em>(8), 620-638.</p>
<p>Boghossian, P. (1989). Content and Self-Knowledge. <em>Philosophical
Topics</em>, 17(1): 5–26.</p>
<p>Bruner, J. (1990). <em>Acts of meaning</em> (Vol. 3). Harvard
university press.</p>
<p>Butterfill, S. &amp; Apperly I.A. (2013). How to construct a minimal
theory of mind. <em>Mind &amp; Language, 28(2)</em>
606-637<em>.</em></p>
<p>Callaghan, T., Rochat, P., Lillard, A., Claux, M. L., Odden, H.,
Itakura, S., ... &amp; Singh, S. (2005). Synchrony in the onset of
mental-state reasoning: Evidence from five cultures. <em>Psychological
Science</em>, <em>16</em>(5), 378-384.</p>
<p>Cantor, N., Mischel, W., &amp; Schwartz, J. C. (1982). A prototype
analysis of psychological situations. Cognitive Psychology, 14,
45-77.</p>
<p>Carpendale, J. I., &amp; Lewis, C. (2004). Constructing an
understanding of mind: The development of children's social
understanding within social interaction. <em>Behavioral and brain
sciences</em>, <em>27</em>(1), 79-96.</p>
<p>Carruthers, P. (2011). <em>The opacity of mind: An integrative theory
of self-knowledge</em>. OUP Oxford.</p>
<p>Chater, N., Zeitoun., H., &amp; Melkonyan, T. (2022). The paradox of
social interaction: shared intentionality, we-reasoning, and virtual
bargaining. <em>Psychological Review, 129(3),</em> 415–437.</p>
<p>Contreras-Huerta, L. S., Pisauro, M. A., &amp; Apps, M. A. (2020).
Effort shapes social cognition and behaviour: A neuro-cognitive
framework. <em>Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews</em>,
<em>118</em>, 426-439.</p>
<p>Conway, J. R., Catmur, C., &amp; Bird, G. (2019). Understanding
individual differences in theory of mind via representation of minds,
not mental states. <em>Psychonomic bulletin &amp; review</em>,
<em>26</em>, 798-812.</p>
<p><mark>Davidson, D. (1973). Radical interpretation. In</mark>
<em>Inquiries into truth and interpretation</em> <mark>(pp. 125–139).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.</mark></p>
<p>Davidson, D. (1974). Belief and the basis of meaning. In
<em>Inquiries into truth and interpretation</em> (pp. 141–154). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.</p>
<p>Davidson, D. (1980). Toward a unified theory of meaning and action.
<em>Grazer Philosophische Studien</em>, <em>11</em>, 1–12.</p>
<p>Davidson, D. (1985). A new basis for decision theory. <em>Theory and
Decision</em>, <em>18</em>, 87–98.</p>
<p>Davidson, D. (1990). The structure and content of truth. <em>The
Journal of Philosophy</em>, <em>87</em>(6), 279–328.</p>
<p>Davidson, D. (1995). Could there be a science of rationality?
<em>International Journal of Philosophical Studies</em>, <em>3</em>(1),
1–16.</p>
<p>Davidson, D. (2004). <em>Problems of rationality</em>. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.</p>
<p><mark>Devine, R.T. (2021). Individual differences in theory of mind
in middle childhood and adolescence. In Devine, R.T. &amp; Lecce, S.
(2021) (Eds). <em>Theory of Mind in Middle Childhood and Adolescence:
Integrating Multiple Perspectives</em> (pp 55-76). Routledge.</mark></p>
<p>Devine, R.T. &amp; Apperly, I.A. (2022) Willing and Able? Theory of
Mind, Social Motivation and Social Competence in Middle Childhood and
Early Adolescence. <em>Developmental Science.</em> <em>25 (1),
e13137.</em></p>
<p>Devine, R. T., &amp; Hughes, C. (2013). Silent films and strange
stories: Theory of mind, gender, and social experiences in middle
childhood. <em>Child development</em>, <em>84</em>(3), 989-1003.</p>
<p><mark>Hughes, C., &amp; Devine, R. T. (2015). Individual differences
in theory of mind from preschool to adolescence: Achievements and
directions.</mark> <em>Child development perspectives</em><mark>,</mark>
<em>9</em><mark>(3), 149-153.</mark></p>
<p>Devine, R. T., &amp; Hughes, C. (2016). Measuring theory of mind
across middle childhood: Reliability and validity of the silent films
and strange stories tasks. <em>Journal of experimental child
psychology</em>, <em>149</em>, 23-40.</p>
<p>Devine, R. T., &amp; Hughes, C. (2018). Family correlates of false
belief understanding in early childhood: A meta‐analysis. <em>Child
development</em>, <em>89</em>(3), 971-987.</p>
<p>Devine, R. T., &amp; Hughes, C. (2019). Let's talk: Parents’ mental
talk (not mind‐mindedness or mindreading capacity) predicts children's
false belief understanding. <em>Child Development</em>, <em>90</em>(4),
1236-1253.</p>
<p>Devine, R. T., Kovatchev, V., Grumley Traynor, I., Smith, P., &amp;
Lee, M. (2023). Machine learning and deep learning systems for automated
measurement of “advanced” theory of mind: Reliability and validity in
children and adolescents. <em>Psychological Assessment</em>,
<em>35</em>(2), 165.</p>
<p>Devine, R. T., &amp; Lecce, S. (Eds.). (2021). <em>Theory of mind in
middle childhood and adolescence: Integrating multiple
perspectives</em>. Routledge.</p>
<p>Devine, R. T., White, N., Ensor, R., &amp; Hughes, C. (2016). Theory
of mind in middle childhood: Longitudinal associations with executive
function and social competence. <em>Developmental psychology</em>,
<em>52</em>(5), 758.</p>
<p>Dennett, D. C. (1988). Précis of the intentional stance.
<em>Behavioral and brain sciences</em>, <em>11</em>(3), 495-505.</p>
<p>Doherty, M. J., &amp; Perner, J. (2020). Mental files: Developmental
integration of dual naming and theory of mind. <em>Developmental
Review</em>, <em>56</em>, 100909.</p>
<p>Dixson, H. G., Komugabe‐Dixson, A. F., Dixson, B. J., &amp; Low, J.
(2018). Scaling theory of mind in a small‐scale society: A case study
from Vanuatu. <em>Child Development</em>, <em>89</em>(6), 2157-2175.</p>
<p>Doherty, M. (2008). <em>Theory of mind: How children understand
others' thoughts and feelings</em>. psychology press.</p>
<p>Dretske, F. (1994). “Introspection”, <em>Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society</em>. 94(1), 263–278.</p>
<p>Dumontheil, I., Apperly, I. A., &amp; Blakemore, S. J. (2010). Online
usage of theory of mind continues to develop in late adolescence.
<em>Developmental Science</em>, <em>13</em>(2), 331-338.</p>
<p>Dziobek, I., Fleck, S., Kalbe, E., Rogers, K., Hassenstab, J., Brand,
M., ... &amp; Convit, A. (2006). Introducing MASC: a movie for the
assessment of social cognition. <em>Journal of autism and developmental
disorders</em>, <em>36</em>, 623-636.</p>
<p>Estes, D., Wellman, H. M., &amp; Woolley, J. D. (1989). Children's
understanding of mental phenomena. In <em>Advances in Child Development
and Behavior</em> (Vol. 22, pp. 41-87).</p>
<p>Ferguson, H. J., &amp; Bradford, E. E. (Eds.). (2021). <em>The
cognitive basis of social interaction across the lifespan</em>. Oxford
University Press.</p>
<p>Fernyhough, C. (2008). Getting Vygotskian about theory of mind:
Mediation, dialogue, and the development of social understanding.
<em>Developmental Review</em>, <em>28</em>(2), 225-262.</p>
<p>Fiske, S. T., &amp; Taylor, S. E. (1984). Social cognition. New York:
Random House.</p>
<p>Fiske, S. T. (1993). Social cognition and social perception.
<em>Annual review of psychology, 44(1),</em> 155-194.</p>
<p>Fodor, J. A. (2001). <em>The mind doesn't work that way: The scope
and limits of computational psychology</em>. MIT press.</p>
<p>Frith, C. D., &amp; Frith, U. (2012). Mechanisms of social cognition.
<em>Annual review of psychology</em>, <em>63</em>, 287-313.</p>
<p>Gallotti, M., &amp; Frith, C. D. (2013). Social cognition in the
we-mode. <em>Trends in Cognitive Sciences</em>, <em>17</em>(4),
160-165.</p>
<p>Gilbert, D. T. (1998). Ordinary personology. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T.,
Fiske, &amp; G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (4th
ed., pp. 8-150). New York: McGraw Hill.</p>
<p>Gilead, M., &amp; Ochsner, K. N. (Eds.). (2021). <em>The neural basis
of mentalizing</em>. New York: Springer International Publishing.</p>
<p>Goldman, A. I. (2006). <em>Simulating minds: The philosophy,
psychology, and neuroscience of mindreading</em>. Oxford University
Press.</p>
<p><mark>Gönültaş, S., Selçuk, B., Slaughter, V., Hunter, J. A., &amp;
Ruffman, T. (2020). The capricious nature of theory of mind: Does mental
state understanding depend on the characteristics of the target?.</mark>
<em>Child Development</em><mark>,</mark> <em>91</em><mark>(2),
e280-e298.</mark></p>
<p>Gopnik, A., &amp; Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). <em>Words, thoughts, and
theories</em>. Mit Press.</p>
<p>Gopnik, A., &amp; Wellman, A. N. (1992). Why the child’s theory of
mind really <em>is</em> a theory. <em>Mind &amp; Language,
7(1&amp;2),</em> 145-171.</p>
<p>Happé, F., Cook, J. L., &amp; Bird, G. (2017). The structure of
social cognition: In (ter) dependence of sociocognitive processes.
<em>Annual review of psychology</em>, <em>68</em>, 243-267.</p>
<p>Harris, P. L. (1992). From simulation to folk psychology: the case
for development. <em>Mind &amp; Language</em>.</p>
<p>Heal, J. (1996). Simulation, theory, and content. In Carruthers, P.,
&amp; Smith, P. K. (Eds.). <em>Theories of theories of mind</em>.
Cambridge university press. 75-89.</p>
<p>Heider, F. (1958). <em>The psychology of interpersonal
relations.</em> Hillsdale, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.</p>
<p>Heyes, C. (2019). Précis of cognitive gadgets: The cultural evolution
of thinking. <em>Behavioral and Brain Sciences</em>, <em>42</em>,
e169.</p>
<p>Hughes, C. (2011). <em>Social understanding and social lives: From
toddlerhood through to the transition to school</em>. Psychology
Press.</p>
<p>Hughes, C., Adlam, A., Happé, F., Jackson, J., Taylor, A., &amp;
Caspi, A. (2000). Good test‐retest reliability for standard and advanced
false‐belief tasks across a wide range of abilities. <em>Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry</em>, <em>41</em>(4), 483-490.</p>
<p>Hughes, C., &amp; Devine, R. T. (2015). Individual differences in
theory of mind from preschool to adolescence: Achievements and
directions. <em>Child development perspectives</em>, <em>9</em>(3),
149-153.</p>
<p>Hughes, C., Devine, R. T., &amp; Wang, Z. (2018). Does parental
mind‐mindedness account for cross‐cultural differences in preschoolers’
theory of mind?. <em>Child development</em>, <em>89</em>(4),
1296-1310.</p>
<p><mark>Ensor, R., &amp; Hughes, C. (2008). Content or connectedness?
Mother–child talk and early social understanding.</mark> <em>Child
development</em><mark>,</mark> <em>79</em><mark>(1), 201-216.</mark></p>
<p>Hutto, D. (2009). Folk psychology as narrative practice. <em>Journal
of Consciousness Studies</em>, <em>16</em>(6-7), 9-39.</p>
<p>Hutto, D. D. (2012). <em>Folk psychological narratives: The
sociocultural basis of understanding reasons</em>. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.</p>
<p><mark>Jeffrey, R. C. (1983).</mark> <em>The logic of decision, second
edition</em><mark>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</mark></p>
<p><em>Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice:
Mapping bounded rationality. American Psychologist, 58(9),
697–720.</em></p>
<p>Ickes, W. (1993). Empathic accuracy. <em>Journal of personality</em>,
<em>61</em>(4), 587-610.</p>
<p>Ickes, W., Robertson, E., Tooke, W., &amp; Teng, G. (1986).
Naturalistic social cognition: Methodology, assessment, and validation.
<em>Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</em>, <em>51</em>(1),
66.</p>
<p>Ickes, W., Buysse, A. N. N., Pham, H. A. O., Rivers, K., Erickson, J.
R., Hancock, M., ... &amp; Gesn, P. R. (2000). On the difficulty of
distinguishing “good” and “poor” perceivers: A social relations analysis
of empathic accuracy data. <em>Personal Relationships</em>,
<em>7</em>(2), 219-234.</p>
<p>Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Schulz, L. E., &amp; Tenenbaum, J. B.
(2016). The naïve utility calculus: Computational principles underlying
commonsense psychology. <em>Trends in cognitive sciences</em>,
<em>20</em>(8), 589-604.</p>
<p>Jeffrey, R. C. (1983). <em>The Logic of Decision, Second
Edition</em>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>
<p>Johnson, S. (2000). The recognition of mentalistic agents in infancy.
<em>Trends in Cognitive Sciences</em>, <em>4</em>, 22–28.</p>
<p>Krupenye, C., &amp; Call, J. (2019). Theory of mind in animals:
Current and future directions. <em>Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Cognitive Science</em>, <em>10</em>(6), e1503.</p>
<p>Lecce, S., Bianco, F., Devine, R. T., &amp; Hughes, C. (2017).
Relations between theory of mind and executive function in middle
childhood: A short-term longitudinal study. <em>Journal of experimental
child psychology</em>, <em>163</em>, 69-86.</p>
<p>Lecce, S., &amp; Devine, R. T. (2021). Social interaction in early
and middle childhood. <em>The cognitive basis of social interaction
across the lifespan</em>, 47-69.</p>
<p>Lecce, S., Ronchi, L., &amp; Devine, R. T. (2022). Mind what teacher
says: Teachers’ propensity for mental‐state language and children's
theory of mind in middle childhood. <em>Social Development</em>,
<em>31</em>(2), 303-318.</p>
<p>Lecce, S., Ronchi, L., &amp; Devine, R. T. (2024). The Effect of
Peers’ Theory of Mind on Children’s Own Theory of Mind development: A
Longitudinal Study in Middle Childhood and Early Adolescence.
<em>Developmental Psychology</em>.</p>
<p>Leslie, A. M. (1987). Pretense and representation: The origins of"
theory of mind.". <em>Psychological review</em>, <em>94</em>(4),
412.</p>
<p>Leslie, A. M., Friedman, O., &amp; German, T. P. (2004). Core
mechanisms in ‘theory of mind’. <em>Trends in cognitive sciences</em>,
<em>8</em>(12), 528-533.</p>
<p>Lewis, D. K. (1972). Psychophysical and theoretical identifications.
Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 50(3), 249–258.</p>
<p>Lillard, A. (1998). Ethnopsychologies: cultural variations in
theories of mind. <em>Psychological bulletin</em>, <em>123</em>(1),
3.</p>
<p>Locke, J. (1689/1975) <em>An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding</em>. P.H. Nidditch (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University
Press.</p>
<p>Long, E. L., Cuve, H. C., Conway, J. R., Catmur, C., &amp; Bird, G.
(2022). Novel theory of mind task demonstrates representation of minds
in mental state inference. <em>Scientific reports</em>, <em>12</em>(1),
21133.</p>
<p>Long, E. L., Catmur, C., &amp; Bird, G. (2024). The Theory of Mind
hypothesis of autism: A critical evaluation of the
status-quo. <em>Psychological Review</em>.</p>
<p>Marangoni, C., Garcia, S., Ickes, W., &amp; Teng, G. (1995). Empathic
accuracy in a clinically relevant setting. <em>Journal of personality
and social psychology</em>, <em>68</em>(5), 854.</p>
<p>Martin, A., &amp; Santos, L. R. (2016). What cognitive
representations support primate theory of mind?. <em>Trends in cognitive
sciences</em>, <em>20</em>(5), 375-382.</p>
<p>McGeer, V. (1996). “Is ‘Self-Knowledge’ an Empirical Problem?
Renegotiating the Space of Philosophical Explanation”. <em>Journal of
Philosophy</em>, 93(10): 483–515.</p>
<p><mark>McLoughlin, N., &amp; Over, H. (2017). Young children are more
likely to spontaneously attribute mental states to members of their own
group.</mark> <em>Psychological Science</em><mark>,</mark>
<em>28</em><mark>(10), 1503-1509.</mark></p>
<p>McNeill, W. E. S. (2012). On Seeing That Someone Is Angry.
<em>European Journal of Philosophy</em> 20(4), 575–97.</p>
<p>Mead, G. H. (1934)<em>. Mind, self and society from the standpoint of
a social behaviorist. University of Chicago Press.</em></p>
<p>Meinhardt‐Injac, B., Daum, M. M., &amp; Meinhardt, G. (2020). Theory
of mind development from adolescence to adulthood: Testing the
two‐component model. <em>British Journal of Developmental
Psychology</em>, <em>38</em>(2), 289-303.</p>
<p>Meins, E. (2013). <em>Security of attachment and the social
development of cognition</em>. Psychology press.</p>
<p><mark>Meins, E., Fernyhough, C., Wainwright, R., Clark‐Carter, D.,
Das Gupta, M., Fradley, E., &amp; Tuckey, M. (2003). Pathways to
understanding mind: Construct validity and predictive validity of
maternal mind‐mindedness.</mark> <em>Child
development</em><mark>,</mark> <em>74</em><mark>(4),
1194-1211.</mark></p>
<p>Moore, R. (2021). The cultural evolution of mind-modelling.
<em>Synthese</em>, <em>199</em>(1), 1751-1776.</p>
<p>Moran, R. (2001). <em>Authority and Estrangement: An Essay on
Self-Knowledge</em>. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.</p>
<p>Morris, A., Phillips, J., Huang, K., &amp; Cushman, F. (2021).
Generating options and choosing between them depend on distinct forms of
value representation. <em>Psychological science</em>, <em>32</em>(11),
1731-1746.</p>
<p>Nelson, K. (1998). <em>Language in cognitive development: The
emergence of the mediated mind</em>. Cambridge University Press.</p>
<p>Osterhaus, C., Koerber, S., &amp; Sodian, B. (2016). Scaling of
advanced theory‐of‐mind tasks. <em>Child development</em>,
<em>87</em>(6), 1971-1991.</p>
<p>Osterhaus, C., &amp; Bosacki, S. L. (2022). Looking for the
lighthouse: A systematic review of advanced theory-of-mind tests beyond
preschool. <em>Developmental Review</em>, <em>64</em>, 101021.</p>
<p><mark>Perez-Zapata, D., Slaughter, V., &amp; Henry, J. D. (2016).
Cultural effects on mindreading.</mark> <em>Cognition</em><mark>,</mark>
<em>146</em><mark>, 410-414.</mark></p>
<p>Perner, J. (1991). <em>Understanding the representational mind</em>.
The MIT Press.</p>
<p>Pickering, M. J., &amp; Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. <em>Behavioral and Brain Sciences</em>,
<em>27</em>(2), 169-190.Scott, R. M., &amp; Baillargeon, R. (2017).
Early false-belief understanding. <em>Trends in cognitive sciences</em>,
<em>21</em>(4), 237-249.</p>
<p>Pomareda, C., Devine, R. T., &amp; Apperly, I. A. (2024a). Social
Motivation, Over and Above Mindreading, is Associated With Social
Support, Autistic Traits, and Depressive Symptoms in Adults.
<em>Manuscript submitted for publication.</em></p>
<p>Pomareda, C., Devine, R. T., &amp; Apperly, I. A. (2024b).
Mindreading quality versus quantity: A theoretically and empirically
motivated two-factor structure for individual differences in adults’
mindreading. <em>Plos one</em>, <em>19</em>(6), e0305270.</p>
<p>Qureshi, A.W., Monk, R.L., Samson, D. &amp; Apperly, I.A. (2020) Does
interference between self and other perspectives in Theory of Mind Tasks
reflect a common underlying process? Evidence from individual
differences in theory of mind and inhibitory control. <em>Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 27(1),</em> 178-190<em>.</em></p>
<p>Redcay, E., &amp; Schilbach, L. (2019). Using second-person
neuroscience to elucidate the mechanisms of social interaction.
<em>Nature Reviews Neuroscience</em>, <em>20</em>(8), 495-505.</p>
<p>Ronchi, L., Banerjee, R., &amp; Lecce, S. (2020). Theory of mind and
peer relationships: The role of social anxiety. <em>Social
Development</em>, <em>29</em>(2), 478-493.</p>
<p>Russell, B. (1917). Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by
Description. In <em>Mysticism and Logic</em>, London: George Allen and
Unwin.</p>
<p>Ryskin, R. A., Benjamin, A. S., Tullis, J., &amp; Brown-Schmidt, S.
(2015). Perspective-taking in comprehension, production, and memory: An
individual differences approach. <em>Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General</em>, <em>144</em>(5), 898.</p>
<p>Schank, R. C., &amp; Abelson, R. P. (1977/2013). <em>Scripts, plans,
goals, and understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge
structures</em>. Psychology Press.</p>
<p>Schelling, T. (1960). <em>The strategy of conflict.</em> Harvard
University Press. </p>
<p>Schilbach, L., Timmermans, B., Reddy, V., Costall, A., Bente, G.,
Schlicht, T., &amp; Vogeley, K. (2013). Toward a second-person
neuroscience 1. <em>Behavioral and Brain Sciences</em>, <em>36</em>(4),
393-414.</p>
<p>Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., &amp; Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint action:
bodies and minds moving together. <em>Trends in Cognitive Sciences</em>,
<em>10</em>(2), 70-76.</p>
<p><mark>Selcuk, B., Gonultas, S., &amp; Ekerim‐Akbulut, M. (2023).
Development and use of theory of mind in social and cultural
context.</mark> <em>Child Development Perspectives</em><mark>,</mark>
<em>17</em><mark>(1), 39-45.</mark></p>
<p>Shoemaker, S. (1994). Self-Knowledge and ‘Inner Sense’.
<em>Philosophy and Phenomenological Research</em>, 54(2): 249–314.</p>
<p>Smith, J. (2010). Seeing Other People. <em>Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research</em> 81(3), 731–48.</p>
<p>Spaulding, S. (2018). <em>How we understand others: Philosophy and
social cognition</em>. Routledge.</p>
<p>Sperber, D., &amp; Wilson, D. (1987). Precis of relevance:
Communication and cognition. <em>Behavioral and Brain Sciences</em>,
<em>10</em>(4), 697-710.</p>
<p>Stich, S. (1983). <em>From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science</em>.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.</p>
<p>Stuhlmüller, A., &amp; Goodman, N. D. (2014). Reasoning about
reasoning by nested conditioning: Modelling theory of mind with
probabilistic programs. <em>Cognitive Systems Research</em>,
<em>28</em>, 80-99.</p>
<p><mark>Tomasello, M. (2010).</mark> <em>Origins of human
communication</em><mark>. MIT press.</mark></p>
<p>Tomasello, M. (2018). How children come to understand false beliefs:
A shared intentionality account. <em>Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences</em>, <em>115</em>(34), 8491-8498.</p>
<p>Veissière, S. P., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J.,
&amp; Kirmayer, L. J. (2020). Thinking through other minds: A
variational approach to cognition and culture. <em>Behavioral and Brain
Sciences</em>, <em>43</em>, e90.</p>
<p>Wellman, H. M. (2014). <em>Making minds: How theory of mind
develops</em>. Oxford University Press.</p>
<p>Wellman, H. M., &amp; Estes, D. (1986). Early understanding of mental
entities: A re-examination of childhood realism. <em>Child
development</em>, 910-923.</p>
<p>Wellman, H. M., Fang, F., &amp; Peterson, C. C. (2011). Sequential
progressions in a theory‐of‐mind scale: Longitudinal perspectives.
<em>Child development</em>, <em>82</em>(3), 780-792.</p>
<p>Whiten, A. (1996). When does smart behaviour-reading become
mind-reading? In P. Carruthers &amp; P. K. Smith (Eds.), <em>Theories of
Theories of Mind</em> (pp. 277–292). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.</p>
<p>Wilson, R., Perez, D. Hruby, A., van der Kleij, S. W. &amp; Apperly
I.A. (2023) Is Recursive “Mindreading” Really an Exception to
Limitations on Recursive Thinking?. <em>Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 152</em>(5), 1454–1468</p>
<p>Wimmer, H., &amp; Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs in young
children's understanding of deception. <em>Cognition</em>,
<em>13</em>(1), 103-128.</p>
<p>Vygotsky, L. S. (1997). Genesis of higher mental functions. In R. W.
Rieber (Ed.). <em>The collected works of L. S. Vygotsky (Vol. 4)</em>.
New York: Plenum (Original work published 1931).</p>
<p>Yeung, E. K. L. (2024) Unpublished doctoral thesis. University of
Birmingham, UK.</p>
<p>Yeung, E. K. L., Apperly, I. A., &amp; Devine, R. T. (2023). Measures
of individual differences in adult theory of mind: A systematic review.
<em>Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews,</em> 105481.</p>
<p>Zaki, J., Bolger, N., &amp; Ochsner, K. (2008). It takes two: The
interpersonal nature of empathic accuracy. <em>Psychological science,
19(4),</em> 399-404.</p>
<p>Zaki, J., Bolger, N., &amp; Ochsner, K. (2009). Unpacking the
informational bases of empathic accuracy. <em>Emotion, 9(4),</em>
478.</p>
<p><mark>Zawidzki, T. W. (2013).</mark> <em>Mindshaping: A new framework
for understanding human social cognition</em><mark>. MIT
Press.</mark></p>
<p>Zunshine, L. (2006). <em>Why we read fiction: Theory of mind and the
novel.</em> Ohio State University Press.</p>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1"><p>The theory’s development is presented in a series of
papers starting with Davidson (1973). The most detailed statement is
Davidson (1990).<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn2"><p>Davidson (1990, 297); Davidson (1985).<a href="#fnref2"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn3"><p>‘if we are to derive meaning and belief from evidence
concerning what causes someone to hold sentences true, it can only be …
because we stipulate a structure.’ (Davidson, 1980, 7)<a href="#fnref3"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn4"><p>‘What makes the task [of interpretation] practicable at
all is the structure that the normative character of thought, desire,
speech, and action imposes on correct attributions of attitudes to
others, and hence on interpretation of their speech and explanations of
their actions.’ (Davidson, 1990, 325; Davidson, 1980, 8)<a
href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn5"><p>There is occasionally confusion on this point because
Davidson famously allows that there is indeterminacy concerning what
someone thinks. Specifically, he rejects the view that ‘each belief has
a definite object’ (Davidson, 1974, 154). But indeterminacy is
consistent with there being facts about people’s mental states. As
Davidson argues, ‘[t]he consequent indeterminacy of interpretation is
not […] any more significant or troublesome than the fact that weight
may be measured in grams or in ounces’ (Davidson, 1980, 6).<a
href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn6"><p>​​‘All we should require of a theory of truth for a
speaker is that it be such that, if an interpreter had explicit
propositional knowledge of the theory, he would know the truth
conditions of utterances of the speaker.’ (Davidson, 1990, 312)<a
href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn7"><p>You cannot say that Maxi’s mental states violate the
theory’s axioms: because the theory aims to be an elucidation of what
mental states are, if he fails to conform to the axioms there is—so the
theory—simply no way of making sense of the idea that he has mental
states at all.<a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn8"><p>Researchers occasionally respond to a related issue in
decision theory by rejecting the idea that decision theory specifies
what preferences and subjective expectations are. On such a view, those
things exist independently of the theory (e.g. Allais, 1979, 548). This
amounts to rejecting one application of decision theory (namely, that of
characterising preferences and the rest) while endorsing other
applications of it. We agree, of course, that the bounds of rationality
are a major obstacle to interpreting decision theory as specifying what
preferences and subjective expectations are. The problem is to provide
an alternative to decision theory (or to Davidson’s theory) which can
ensure all researchers have a shared understanding of these states. As
far as we are aware, this challenge is yet to be met.<a href="#fnref8"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn9"><p>Compare Davidson (2004, 181): ‘if we are going to
explain irrationality at all, it seems we must assume that the mind can
be partitioned into quasi-independent structures that interact in ways
the Plato Principle [according to which there is no internal
irrationality] cannot accept or explain.’<a href="#fnref9"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn10"><p>Of course this brief discussion does not exclude other
possible responses to the problems. We also acknowledge that there are
entirely different views about the conceptual foundations of
mindreading—for instance, some philosophers have held that mental states
can be perceived (Smith, 2010; McNeill, 2012), which would motivate a
different view. What we have shown here is just that the most
influential, best developed theory motivates our conclusions about what
it is to be in a position to use mindreading concepts effectively.<a
href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn11"><p>The original text was numbered “ii” but context
indicates this must have been a typographical error<a href="#fnref11"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn12"><p>These concerns are a particular instance of a
widely-recognised set of challenges about identifying what is relevant
in problem spaces that are very large or only imprecisely specified
(e.g., Fodor 2001; Sperber &amp; Wilson, 1987). We are not proposing a
solution to these challenges, which are sometimes thought to be
intractable. We are proposing that progress can be made by recognising
the existence of these challenges, recognising their particular
character in relation to mindreading, and using this analysis to make
tractable predictions and interpretations of empirical phenomena.<a
href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn13"><p>Analogous alignment phenomena occur in non-verbal
interaction and coordination (e.g., Brahimi et al., 2010; Sebanz et al.,
2006).<a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn14"><p>Informal feedback indicated that some readers may
perceive similarity to a widely-recognised political acronym. For the
avoidance of doubt, M-A-J-A is pronounced in the same way as the word
“major”, following the sounds of the words that it denotes.<a
href="#fnref14" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn15"><p>Simulation is often thought to play a role in
interactive alignment. For example, Garrod and Pickering (2004) suggest
that “forward models” generated by one’s own processes for speech
production also serve a predictive role during speech comprehension.
This does not mean that simulation provides an account of mindreading.<a
href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn16"><p>Indeed, one of his objectives is to argue that
mindreading is of secondary importance to mindshaping in explaining
human social abilities.<a href="#fnref16" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn17"><p>For example, Devine and Hughes (2013) describe an item
from the “silent films” task as follows: “Harold (the main character) is
sitting on the back of a van while he ﬁlls in a form. The driver, who is
unaware of Harold’s presence, is collecting laundry. The driver, who
appears to have difﬁculty hearing, returns to his van, locks the door
and drives away. Harold is then trapped in the back of the van.” The
critical question is: “Why do you think the driver locks Harold in the
van?”. A correct answer requires participants to acknowledge the
critical role of the driver’s ignorance: e.g., “Because the driver
didn’t know Harold was in the van”. Many 3-year-olds succeed on
developmentally sensitive tests of the necessary core concepts of
understanding knowledge/ignorance (e.g., Wellman &amp; Liu, 2004), yet
there was significant variance in the success of 8- to 13-year-olds in
Devine and Hughes’ (2013) study. Many participants provided only a
partial explanation (e.g., in terms of the driver’s desire to continue
his rounds), or a completely incorrect explanation (e.g., ascribing a
desire to kidnap Harold). We think it unlikely that these participants
lacked a concept of knowledge versus ignorance or any other mindreading
concept. Instead, we suggest that their difficulty was with identifying
the most plausible and appropriate explanation.<a href="#fnref17"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn18"><p>The idea that mindreaders might simulate the discussion
itself fits with the spirit of some neo-Vygotskian accounts that give
internalised dialogue a key role in higher mental functions (e.g.,
Fernyhough, 2007). Our proposal does not entail simulation of the
discussion, just the ability to simulate the results of such a
discussion.<a href="#fnref18" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
</ol>
</section>


</div>
