--- 
title: "Coordinating Joint Action"
authors: "Stephen A. Butterfill"
year: 2017
isForthcoming: false
booktitle: "Routledge Handbook on Collective Intentionality"
pages: "68-82"
pdfUrl: "/pdf/butterfill2017_coordinating.pdf"
bibtex: "@incollection{butterfill:2017_coordinating,\n    address = {New York},\n    author = {Butterfill, Stephen A.},\n    booktitle = {The {{Routledge Handbook}} of {{Collective Intentionality}}},\n    date-added = {2018-01-25 21:25:45 +0000},\n    editor = {Jankovic, Marija and Ludwig, Kirk},\n    isbn = {978-1-138-78363-8},\n    language = {English},\n    pages = {68--82},\n    publisher = {{Routledge}},\n    timestamp = {2018-01-25T21:25:38Z},\n    title = {Coordinating Joint Action}\n}"
---



<div class='fulltext'>
<p class="italic">
This is a slightly extended version of published chapter. (The pdf is the chapter version.)
</p>

<h1 id="sec:introduction">Introduction</h1>
<p>It is often necessary that agents’ actions are coordinated if they
are to successfully exercise shared (or ‘collective’) agency in acting
together. An eloping couple clink plastic beakers of cheap wine together
to toast their escape, sharing a smile of achievement; on the beach in
front of them a small group of roadies are putting up a marquee outside
for a concert later that evening while the musicians, having been made
to wait while the audio technicians replace a cable, playfully improvise
on stage. In cases like these, successfully exercising shared agency
involves coordinating actions precisely in space and time. Such precise
coordination is not, or not only, a matter of having intentions and
knowledge, whether individual or collective. Intentions and knowledge
states may play a role in long-term coordination—they may explain, for
instance, why the couple’s both being on the beach tonight is no
accident. But they cannot explain how the precise coordination needed to
clink beakers or to share a smile is achieved. Given that is not only
intention or knowledge, what does enable two or more agents’ actions to
be coordinated and so enables exercises of shared agency such as
these?</p>
<p>Much psychological and neuroscientific research bears directly on
this question. This chapter introduces that research: it outlines some
of the key findings and describes a minimal theoretical framework,
identifying along the way issues likely to be of interest to researchers
studying collective intentionality.</p>
<h1 id="sec:theoretical-framework">Joint Action</h1>
<p>Where philosophers tend to focus on notions such as intentional
shared agency, scientific research on coordination mechanisms is usually
interpreted in terms of a broader and simpler notion of joint action.
This is standardly defined by appeal to <span class="citation"
data-cites="Sebanz:2006yq">Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich
(2006)</span>’s working definition as:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>‘any form of social interaction whereby two or more individuals
coordinate their actions in space and time to bring about a change in
the environment’ (<span class="citation"
data-cites="Sebanz:2006yq">(Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich 2006,
70)</span>).</p>
</blockquote>
<p>Although widely used, this working definition has some drawbacks. It
requires that joint actions should be ‘social interactions’, thereby
raising tricky issues about which interactions are social. The working
definition also appears to require that coordinating their actions is
something the individuals involved in joint action do, perhaps even
requiring that this is done with the end of bringing about a change. As
we will see, there are reasons to consider the possibility actions can
be coordinated without both (or even either) requirements being met. We
can avoid the drawbacks while remaining true to the implicit conception
underlying scientific research with a simpler and extremely broad
definition:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>A <em>joint action</em> is an event grounded <a href="#fn1"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> by
two or more agents’ actions.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>This definition of joint action, like <span class="citation"
data-cites="Sebanz:2006yq">Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich
(2006)</span>’s working definition, is neutral on representations and
processes. So when two people swing their arms in synchrony, the event
of them swinging their arms is a joint action. Likewise, if fish are
agents then the movements of a shoal are joint actions. <a href="#fn2"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a></p>
<p>How does research on coordination in joint action bear on the
question about shared agency? Not all joint actions involve exercising
shared agency, but some or all exercises of shared agency are, or
involve, joint actions. It is reasonable to conjecture that what enables
the actions of agents exercising collective agency to be precisely
coordinated are mechanisms of coordination common to many different
forms of joint action. To illustrate, consider entrainment.</p>
<h1 id="sec:entrainment">Entrainment</h1>
<p>Entrainment, the process of synchronizing two or more rhythmic
behaviours with respect to phase, is a feature of everyday life. People
walking side by side may fall into the same walking patterns <span
class="citation"
data-cites="vanulzen:2008_characteristics nessler:2009_interpersonal">(Ulzen
et al. 2008; Nessler and Gilliland 2009)</span>, conversation partners
sometimes synchronize their body sway <span class="citation"
data-cites="shockley:2003_mutual">(Shockley, Santana, and Fowler
2003)</span> and gaze <span class="citation"
data-cites="richardson:2007_art">(D. C. Richardson, Dale, and Kirkham
2007)</span>, clusters of male fiddler crabs wave their claws
synchronously to attract mates <span class="citation"
data-cites="backwell:1998_synchronized merker:2009_role">(Backwell et
al. 1998; Merker, Madison, and Eckerdal 2009)</span>, and an audience
will sometimes briefly synchronise its clapping <span class="citation"
data-cites="neda:2000_self">(Néda et al. 2000)</span>.</p>
<p>As these examples suggest, entrainment enables the coordination of a
wide range of joint actions, not all of which involve shared agency. In
fact interpersonal entrainment is sometimes treated as a special case of
a process by which sequences of actions can be synchronised with
sequences of environmental stimuli such as a metronome <span
class="citation"
data-cites="repp:2013_sensorimotor konvalinka:2010_follow">(e.g. Repp
and Su 2013; Konvalinka et al. 2010)</span>, and, more boldly, sometimes
even as just one instance of what happens when oscillators are coupled
<span class="citation" data-cites="shockley:2009_conversation">(e.g.
Shockley, Richardson, and Dale 2009, 314)</span>.</p>
<p>Which exercises of shared agency might entrainment enable?
Entrainment allows for extremely precise coordination of movements <span
class="citation" data-cites="repp:2000_compensation">(Repp 2000)</span>
and is probably essential for joint actions involving rhythmic music,
dance, drill, and some martial arts.</p>
<p>How is entrainment related to agents’ intentions concerning
coordination or the lack thereof? Entrainment of two or more agents’
actions can occur without any intention concerning coordination <span
class="citation" data-cites="varlet:2015_informational">(e.g. Varlet et
al. 2015)</span>, and without the agents being aware of the coordination
of their actions <span class="citation"
data-cites="richardson:2005_effects">(Michael J. Richardson, Marsh, and
Schmidt 2005)</span>. Further, although subjects can sometimes
intentionally prevent entrainment, entrainment and related forms of
coordination do sometimes occur even despite individuals attempting not
to coordinate their actions <span class="citation"
data-cites="vanulzen:2008_characteristics issartel:2007_unintended">(e.g.
Ulzen et al. 2008; Issartel, Marin, and Cadopi 2007)</span>. So whether
two agents’ actions become entrained is not always, and perhaps not
typically, something which they do or could control.</p>
<p>But entrainment is not always independent of agents’ intentions <span
class="citation"
data-cites="miles:2010_too nessler:2009_interpersonal">(Miles et al.
2010; Nessler and Gilliland 2009)</span>. Because no one can perform two
actions without introducing some tiny variation between them,
entrainment of any kind depends on continuous monitoring and ongoing
adjustments <span class="citation"
data-cites="repp:2005_sensorimotor">(Repp 2005, 976)</span>. One kind of
adjustment is a phase shift, which occurs when one action in a sequence
is delayed or brought forwards in time. Another kind of adjustment is a
period shift; that is, an increase or reduction in the speed with which
all future actions are performed, or in the delay between all future
adjacent pairs of actions. These two kinds of adjustment, phase shifts
and period shifts, appear to be made by mechanisms acting independently,
so that correcting errors involves a distinctive pattern of
overadjustment. <a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> <span class="citation"
data-cites="repp:2005_sensorimotor">Repp (2005, 987)</span> argues,
further, that while adjustments involving phase shifts are largely
automatic, adjustments involving changes in frequency are to some extent
controlled. This may be key to understanding the influence of intention
on entrainment. One way or another (contrast <span class="citation"
data-cites="fairhurst:2013_being">Fairhurst, Janata, and Keller (2013,
2599)</span> with <span class="citation"
data-cites="repp:2008_sensorimotor">Repp and Keller (2008)</span>’s
‘coordinative strategies’ proposal), intentions play a role in frequency
adjustments and thereby influence how tightly agents synchronise their
actions.</p>
<p>Entrainment is clearly necessary for coordination in many joint
actions requiring precise synchronisation such as those involving
rhythmic music or dance. Entrainment may also be important in ways as
yet barely understood for a much wider range of joint actions in which
such precise synchronisation initially appears unnecessary. <a
href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> But there must be more to
coordinating joint actions than entrainment. After all entrainment
depends on repetition whereas many joint actions are one-off events, as
when the a couple clink plastic beakers. Which forms of coordination
enable one-off joint actions?</p>
<h1 id="sec:co-representation">Motor Simulation</h1>
<p>Many one-off joint actions—those which do not depend on repetition or
rhythm—require precise coordination. In clinking beakers, swinging a
toddler between our arms, and executing a pass in football, the window
for success may be fractions of a second in duration and but millimetres
wide. One way—perhaps the only way—of achieving such precise
coordination depends on the existence of a phenomenon often called
‘motor simulation’ or ‘mirroring’. What is this?</p>
<p>To understand motor simulation it is necessary first to get a rough
fix on the idea that motor processes and representations are involved in
performing ordinary, individual actions. Preparing for, and performing,
bodily actions involves not only intentions and practical reasoning but
also motor representations and processes. To illustrate, consider a cook
who has grasped an egg between her finger and thumb and is now lifting
it from the egg box. She will typically grip the egg just tightly enough
to secure it. But how tightly she needs to grip it depends in part, of
course, on the forces to which she will subject the egg in lifting it.
The fact that she grips eggs just tightly enough throughout such action
sequences which vary in how she lifts the egg implies that how tightly
she grips the egg depends on the path along which she will lift it. This
in turn indicates (along with much other evidence) that information
about her anticipated future hand and arm movements appropriately
influences how tightly the cook initially grips the egg <span
class="citation" data-cites="kawato:1999_internal">(Kawato 1999)</span>.
This fine-grained, anticipatory control of grasp, like many other
features of action performance (<span class="citation"
data-cites="rosenbaum:2010_human">(see Rosenbaum 2009, chap. 1)</span>
for more examples), is not plausibly a consequence of mindless
physiology, nor of intention and practical reasoning. The processes and
representations it depends on are motoric.</p>
<p>Motor processes and representations lead a double life: they occur
not only in performing actions but also observing them. For instance, in
someone observing the cook gripping and lifting the egg, there may be
motor processes and representations related to those which would occur
in her if she, the observer, were performing this action herself. One
dramatic piece of evidence for this claim comes from a study in which
activity in an observer’s motor cortex was artificially boosted with
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). This caused minute patterns of
activation (specifically, motor-evoked potentials) to occur in a muscle
of the observer at just the times the agent being observed used the
corresponding muscle. <a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> As this illustrates, motor processes
in an observer can carry detailed information about the timing of
components of actions. <em>Motor simulation</em> is the occurrence of
motor processes and representations in an observer concerning an action
which she is observing or imagining and which are driven by observing or
imagining that action.</p>
<p>Motor simulation enables observers to anticipate how others’ actions
will unfold and the likely outcomes the actions will achieve <span
class="citation" data-cites="Wolpert:2003mg Wilson:2005qu">(Wolpert,
Doya, and Kawato 2003; Wilson and Knoblich 2005)</span>. Such
anticipation is reflected both in explicit judgements <span
class="citation" data-cites="aglioti_action_2008">(e.g. Aglioti et al.
2008)</span> and in spontaneous eye movements <span class="citation"
data-cites="Flanagan:2003lm Rotman:2006xf Costantini:2012fk ambrosini:2011_grasping">(e.g.
Flanagan and Johansson 2003; Rotman et al. 2006; Costantini et al. 2014;
Ambrosini, Costantini, and Sinigaglia 2011)</span>.</p>
<p>How does any of this bear on the coordination of joint action? If
motor simulation is to play a role in coordinating joint actions, agents
must be capable of using anticipation based on motor simulation in
preparing and performing actions different from those simulated.
Accordingly, <span class="citation"
data-cites="kourtis:2012_predictive">Kourtis, Sebanz, and Knoblich
(2013)</span> used neural markers of motor activity to show that motor
simulation can occur in joint action even where agents are performing
different actions in close succession. To investigate, further, whether
motor simulation in joint action can facilitate coordination, <span
class="citation" data-cites="vesper:2012_jumping">Vesper et al.
(2013)</span> instructed pairs of people to jump and land at the same
time. They found evidence that in some subjects there was a motor
simulation of her partner’s jump which influences how she herself jumps
and so enables precise coordination in landing together. This is one
example of how motor simulation may enable coordination in joint action.
<a href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
<p>Reflecting on entrainment and coordination driven by motor
simulation, it is striking that one-off motor simulation allows greater
flexibility at the cost of some precision. Is there a more general
trade-off between flexibility and precision in mechanisms underpinning
coordination? If so, what might this tell us about the nature of
mechanisms underpinning coordination for joint action and their
relations to each other?</p>
<h1 id="sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff">Flexibility vs
Precision</h1>
<p>Consider two ways of partially ordering mechanisms underpinning
coordination. The first is precision: How precise, in space and time, is
the coordination they underpin in the best cases? For instance,
mechanisms underpinning entrainment enable expert musicians to
coordinate their actions to within tens of milliseconds, whereas one-off
motor simulation permits coordination of actions to within larger
fractions of a second. A second partial ordering is flexibility: How
wide is the range of situations in which this mechanism can underpin
coordination? For instance, motor simulation can underpin coordination
whether or not repetition or rhythm is involved, unlike entrainment.
Thinking just about motor simulation and mechanisms underpinning
entrainment, there appears to be a trade-off between precision and
flexibility. This appears to generalise to other forms of coordination
too, such as forms of coordination driven by shared intention. Gains in
flexibility seem to come at the cost of precision.</p>
<p>Why? Before attempting to answer this question, it is useful to fix
terminology with some stipulations. A <em>goal</em> of an action or
behaviour is an outcome to which it is directed. Relative to a
particular action or behaviour, goals can be partially ordered by the
means-end relation. In saying that one goal is more <em>abstract</em>
than another relative to a behaviour or action, I shall mean that the
latter is linked to the former by a chain of outcomes ordered as means
to ends. A <em>goal-state</em> is a mental state (or a structure of
mental states) which represents, or otherwise specifies, an outcome and
is the kind of thing in virtue of which some actions or behaviours can
be directed to certain outcomes. Given that intentions are mental
states, they are paradigmatic goal-states. But intentions are not the
only goal-states: as we saw in <a href="#sec:co-representation"
data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:co-representation">4</a>, some motor representations
are also goal-states. <a href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a></p>
<p>So why might flexibility in a mechanism underpinning coordination
come at the cost of precision? One possibility involves two conjectures.
First, achieving flexibility generally depends on representing goals,
and the more abstract the goals that can be represented, the greater the
flexibility. To illustrate, entrainment can occur without any
representations of goals at all, whereas motor simulation involves motor
representations which are goal-states. But relative to intentions or
knowledge states, motor representations are limited with respect to how
abstract the outcomes they can specify are. Motor representations can
specify outcomes such as grasping or transporting a fragile object, and
even sequences of such outcomes <span class="citation"
data-cites="Fogassi:2005nf">(see, e.g., Fogassi et al. 2005)</span>. But
they cannot specify outcomes such as selecting an organic egg or testing
for freshness: motor processes and representations are mostly blind to
things so distantly related to bodily action. A further conjecture is
that processes involving more abstract goal representations typically
(but not necessarily always) place greater demands on cognitive
resources, which typically (but not necessarily always) results in lower
precision. This conjecture is suggested by an analogy with the
physiological. Because physiological processes are a source of
variability, coordinating with a given degree of precision should get
harder as the duration and complexity of the actions to be coordinated
increases. Given that cognitive processes, like physiological processes,
are a source of variability, increasing cognitive demands by relying on
representations of more abstract goals should likewise increase
variability and so limit precision.</p>
<p>In short, flexibility may come at the cost of precision because
increasing flexibility requires representations of more abstract goals,
which impose greater cognitive demands and thereby increase variability,
so reducing how precise the coordination underpinned by a mechanism can
be in the best cases. This may be why forms of coordination such as
entrainment and motor representation can occur independently of, and
even contrary to, intentions concerning coordination: precision requires
such independence.</p>
<p>Thinking about trading precision for flexibility suggests that there
is a gap in the forms of coordination so far considered. To see why,
consider the situation of a couple alone on a beach. Having filled
plastic beakers with wine, they spontaneously and fluidly clink them
together in a toast without spilling a drop of wine. To explain how they
are able to coordinate so precisely we cannot appeal to motor simulation
alone; but it would be no less plausible to appeal only to practical
deliberation involving intentions or other propositional attitudes. We
need something more flexible than motor simulation and more precise than
practical deliberation.</p>
<h1 id="sec:task-co-repr-1">Task Co-representation</h1>
<p>Consider individual agents acting alone for a moment. A <em>task
representation</em> links an event to an outcome in such a way that,
normally, the event’s actual or expected occurrence would trigger motor
preparation for actions that should realise the outcome. Why do we need
task representations? Imagine yourself cycling up to a crossroad. Even
if you are concentrating hard on dodging potholes without being hit by
the rapidly approaching car behind you (will it slow down or should you
risk going through this hole?), it is likely—hopefully—that the traffic
light’s turning red will cause you to brake. The connection between red
light events and braking actions need not require intentional control,
thanks to task representations.</p>
<p>How is task representation relevant to coordinating joint actions?
Let us say that two individuals have a <em>task co-representation</em>
if there is a task concerning which each has a task representation. <a
href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a> <span class="citation"
data-cites="Sebanz:2006yq">Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich (2006)</span>
argue that the agents of a joint action can have a task
co-representation concerning a task which only one of them is actually
supposed to perform. This, they suggest, would enable agents to exploit
motor simulation prior to, and independently of, observing the any
actual actions. Thus task co-representation could in principle greatly
extend the range of situations in which motor simulation could underpin
coordination in joint action. To illustrate, consider again the couple
on the beach filling beakers with wine and then clinking them together.
As noted earlier (in <a href="#sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff"
data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff">5</a>), their doing
this spontaneously, fluidly and with precision could not be explained by
motor simulation alone when neither of them plays the role of leader.
But it could be explained by Sebanz et al’s proposal about task
co-representation. If the couple expect to clink beakers after the wine
is poured and have task co-representations concerning each’s task in the
clinking, then they will be able to use motor simulation to anticipate
each other’s actions in advance of starting to act. This is one
illustration of how task co-representation might underpin coordination
for one-off joint actions where agents have to respond to events in ways
they have never done before.</p>
<p>The task co-representation hypothesis—agents involved in a joint
action can have a task co-representation concerning a task that only one
of them is supposed to perform—generates a variety of predictions. It
predicts interference and facilitation effects: when acting together
with another, your performance of your task will be affected by facts
about which task the other is performing, and your performance will be
impaired or enhanced in ways analogous to those in which it would be
affected if you were performing both tasks alone. This prediction has
been confirmed for a variety of tasks <span class="citation"
data-cites="Sebanz:2005fk atmaca:2011_joint bockler:2012_effects wel:2015_entrainment">(Sebanz,
Knoblich, and Prinz 2005; Atmaca, Sebanz, and Knoblich 2011; Böckler,
Knoblich, and Sebanz 2012; Wel and Fu 2015)</span>. The task
co-representation hypothesis also predicts that, in some situations when
you are acting with another, events linked to the other’s task will
trigger some preparation (but not necessarily full preparation) in you
for a task which is actually supposed to be performed by the other.
Evidence in support of this prediction includes signs that agents of a
joint action sometimes inhibit tendencies to act when another, rather
than she herself, is supposed act <span class="citation"
data-cites="sebanz:2006_twin_peaks tsai:2008_action">(Sebanz et al.
2006; C.-C. Tsai et al. 2008)</span>, as well as signs that agents of a
joint action are sometimes preparing for, or even covertly performing,
actions that another is supposed to perform <span class="citation"
data-cites="kourtis:2012_predictive baus:2014_predicting">(e.g. Kourtis,
Sebanz, and Knoblich 2013; Baus et al. 2014)</span>. <a href="#fn9"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a></p>
<p>Task co-representation is valuable in coordinating joint actions at
least in part because it is more flexible than bare motor simulation
while also more precise than practical reasoning. But there is a limit
to what can be explained with either motor simulation or task
co-representation, at least as we have conceived of them so far. Suppose
motor simulation (whether or not triggered by a task co-representation)
enables agents of a joint action to anticipate each other’s actions. How
could these anticipations inform preparation for their own actions, and,
in particular, how could they do so without requiring cognitive
processes inimical to precision? To offer even a candidate answer to
this question requires going beyond motor simulation and task
co-representation as we have so far conceived them.</p>
<h1 id="sec:emergent-vs-planned">Emergent vs Planned Coordination</h1>
<p>In thinking about coordination for joint action it is useful to have
plural counterparts of the notions of goal and goal-state introduced
earlier (in <a href="#sec:co-representation" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:co-representation">4</a>). To say of an outcome that
it is a <em>collective goal</em> of some actions or behaviours is to say
that they are collectively directed to this outcome—that is, they are
directed to this outcome and their being so directed is not, or not
only, a matter of each action or behaviour being individually directed
to that outcome. This is a broad notion: raising a brood can be a
collective goal of some eusocial insects’ behaviours, <a href="#fn10"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10" role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a>
and repairing a broken fence can be a collective goal of some
neighbours’ actions. A <em>collective goal-state</em> is a mental state
or, more likely, a structure of mental states, which specifies an
outcome and is the kind of thing in virtue of which some pluralities of
actions or behaviours can be collectively directed to certain outcomes.
Bratman’s account of shared intention aims to describe one kind of
collective goal-state <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1993je">(Bratman 1993)</span>.</p>
<p>Following <span class="citation"
data-cites="Knoblich:2010fk">Knoblich, Butterfill, and Sebanz
(2011)</span>, we can distinguish between emergent and planned
coordination. <em>Planned coordination</em> is coordination driven by a
collective goal-state, <a href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a> whereas <em>emergent
coordination</em> is coordination not so driven. Planned coordination is
familiar from philosophical discussions of shared intention, one of the
functions of which is to coordinate agents’ actions <span
class="citation" data-cites="Bratman:1993je">(Bratman 1993, 99)</span>.
By contrast, all the forms of coordination discussed in this chapter so
far—entrainment as well as coordination driven by action and task
co-representations—are naturally thought of as forms of emergent
coordination insofar as it seems they could occur independently of the
agents having any collective goal-state. <a href="#fn12"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12" role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a>
But there is also a growing body of evidence about the existence of
planned coordination for joint action.</p>
<h1 id="sec:collective-goal-states">Collective Goal-States</h1>
<p>Two pianists are producing tones in the course of playing a duet.
Consider one of the pianists. There is an outcome to which her action is
directed, the production of a tone or melody; and there is an outcome to
which her and her partner’s actions are collectively directed, the
production of a combination of pitches or harmony. Do dueting pianists
represent collective goals, that is, outcomes to which their actions are
collectively directed?</p>
<p>One way to investigate this question involves covertly introducing
errors. <span class="citation" data-cites="loehr:2013_monitoring">Janeen
D. Loehr et al. (2013)</span> contrasted two kinds of error: those which
were errors relative to the goal of an individual pianist’s actions (the
pitch) but not relative to the collective goal of the two pianists’
actions (the harmony); and those which were errors relative to both.
They found neural signatures for both kinds of errors in expert
pianists. This is evidence that dueting pianists do indeed represent
collective goals. A further study indicates that these collective goals
are represented motorically <span class="citation"
data-cites="loehr:2015_sound">(Janeen D. Loehr and Vesper 2015)</span>.
<a href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a></p>
<p>How might motor representations of collective goals underpin
coordination for joint action? One possible answer is suggested by <span
class="citation" data-cites="gallotti:2013_social">Gallotti and Frith
(2013)</span> who propose that a ‘we-mode’ is required. They
explain:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>‘The central idea of the we-mode is that interacting agents share
their minds by representing their contributions to the joint action as
contributions to something that they are going to pursue together, as a
‘we’. […] To represent things in the we-mode is for interacting
individuals to have the content of their individual actions specified by
representing aspects of the interactive scene in a distinct
psychological attitude of intending-together, believing-together,
desiring-together, etc’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="gallotti:2013_social">(Gallotti and Frith 2013,
163)</span>.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>An alternative possible answer is suggested by what <span
class="citation" data-cites="vesper_minimal_2010">Vesper et al.
(2010)</span> call a ‘minimal architecture for joint action’. They
propose to start by attempting to characterise joint action and its
coordination without postulating distinct psychological attitudes and
without invoking representations of interacting agents as comprising a
‘we’. Instead their proposal is that some or all of the representations
underpinning coordination for joint action are ordinary motor
representations, task representations and other representations that are
also involved in the coordination of ordinary, individual action.
Relatedly, in at least some cases, coordination is driven by
representations which are <em>agent-neutral</em>, that is, which do not
specify any particular agent or agent. This proposal is consistent with
theories about the roles of motor simulation and task co-representation
in coordinating joint action (see <a href="#sec:co-representation"
data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:co-representation">4</a> and <a
href="#sec:task-co-repr-1" data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:task-co-repr-1">6</a>): anticipating another’s
actions and their effects appears to involve much the same agent-neutral
motor and task representations which would be involved if one were
actually performing those actions oneself. Of course, motor and task
representations concerning actions others will eventually perform must
ultimately have effects different from those concerning actions the
agent will perform; but this is necessary for both observation and joint
action and need not involve a novel kind of attitude.</p>
<p>But how, given <span class="citation"
data-cites="vesper_minimal_2010">Vesper et al. (2010)</span>’s ‘minimal
architecture’ proposal, could motor representations of collective goals
underpin coordination for joint action? In each agent of a joint action,
the motor representations of collective goals trigger preparation for
action in just the way any motor representations do. This has the effect
that each agent is preparing to perform all of the actions comprising a
joint action, although not necessarily in much detail <span
class="citation" data-cites="loehr:2015_sound">(compare Janeen D. Loehr
and Vesper 2015)</span>. Now this may appear wasteful given that each
agent will only perform a subset of the actions prepared for. But it is
not. One agent’s preparing (to some extent) to perform all of the
actions that will comprise a joint action ensures that the resulting
motor plan for her actions will be constrained by her motor plan for the
others’ actions. And, given that she is sufficiently similar to the
others and that the possibilities for action are sufficiently
constrained in their situation, her motor plan for the others’ actions
will reliably match their motor plans for their actions. So one agent’s
preparing to perform all of the actions has the effect that her motor
plan for her actions is indirectly constrained by the others’ motor
plans for their actions. In this way, motor representations of
collective goals could in principle underpin coordination for joint
action by enabling agents to meet relational constraints on their
actions <span class="citation"
data-cites="butterfill:2015_planning">(see further Butterfill
2016)</span>.</p>
<p>The conjecture that motor representations of collective goals
underpin coordination for joint action provides one response to a
question raised at the end of <a href="#sec:task-co-repr-1"
data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:task-co-repr-1">6</a>. The question was how
anticipations concerning another’s actions arising from motor simulation
(whether bare motor simulation or occurring as a consequence of task
co-representation) feed into preparing and monitoring your own actions.
When coordination depends on motor representations of collective goals,
the presupposition this question makes is incorrect. There are not two
processes but one. Anticipation of another’s actions and preparation for
your own are not two separate things. They are parts of a single process
in the same sense that, in preparing to perform a bimanual action,
preparation for the actions to be performed by the left hand and
anticipation of the movements of the right hand are parts of a single
process. So where motor simulation and task co-representation involve
collective goals to which a joint action is directed, motor processes
themselves can ensure the integration of anticipations concerning
another’s actions with preparation for your own.</p>
<p>This is not quite the end of the story about collective goals.
Research on perceiving joint affordances points to a second way in which
motor representations of collective goals may underpin coordination in
joint action.</p>
<h1 id="sec:joint-affordances">Joint Affordances</h1>
<p>A <em>joint affordance</em> is an affordance for the agents of a
joint action collectively—that is, it is an affordance for these agents
and this is not, or not only, a matter of its being an affordance for
any of the individual agents. Perceiving (or otherwise detecting) joint
affordances is critical for many mundane joint actions such as
appropriately gripping objects and applying the right force in moving
them together, and crossing a busy road while holding hands. It is
possible that motor representations of collective goals enable the
agents of some joint actions to perceive joint affordances, or so I will
suggest in this section. <a href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref14" role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a> But first, what
grounds are there for supposing that joint affordances even exist?</p>
<p><span class="citation"
data-cites="doerrfeld:2012_expecting">Doerrfeld, Sebanz, and Shiffrar
(2012, 474)</span> argue that ‘the joint action abilities of a group
shape the individual perception of its members.’ In their experiment,
perceptual judgements of weight were affected by whether the perceiver
was about to lift the box alone or with another. Others have
investigated different situations in which performing actions
independently or as part of a joint action can affect how you perceive
affordances. For instance, consider two individuals walking through a
doorway. How wide must the doorway be for them to walk though it without
rotating their shoulders? <span class="citation"
data-cites="davis:2010_perceiving">Davis et al. (2010, Experiment
1)</span> show that the answer cannot be obtained simply by adding the
minimum widths for each individual, and (in Experiments 2–4) that people
can perceive whether doorway-like openings will allow a particular pair
of walkers to pass through comfortably. <a href="#fn15"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15" role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a>
Importantly, people can perceive joint affordances for walkers not only
when they are one of those walking but also when they are merely
observing others walking together <span class="citation"
data-cites="davis:2010_perceiving">(Davis et al. 2010, Experiment
4)</span>. This suggests that the perceptual capacity does not depend on
the perceiver’s own current possibilities for action. So what makes
perception of joint affordances possible?</p>
<p>Consider the conjecture that joint affordances are perceived as a
consequence of motor simulation (this is one of two possibilities
discussed by <span class="citation"
data-cites="doerrfeld:2012_expecting">(Doerrfeld, Sebanz, and Shiffrar
2012)</span>). This conjecture is made plausible by independent evidence
for two hypotheses. First, motor representations can modulate perceptual
experience; for instance, how an event is represented motorically can
affect how a pair of tones are perceived with respect to pitch (<span
class="citation" data-cites="repp:2007_action repp:2009_performed">(Repp
and Knoblich 2007, 2009)</span>; for discussion, see <span
class="citation" data-cites="sinigaglia:2015_puzzle">(Sinigaglia and
Butterfill 2015)</span>). Second, perceiving another’s affordance
involves motor activity <span class="citation"
data-cites="cardellicchio:2012_grasping">(Cardellicchio, Sinigaglia, and
Costantini 2012)</span>. These two findings make it plausible that, in
general, perceiving some affordances is facilitated or even enabled by
motor simulation. The findings just discussed suggest that the same may
be true for joint affordances, that is, affordances for agents involved
in one or another kind of joint action. But of course this is possible
only given that there are motor representations of collective goals.
After all, perceiving joint affordances requires motor simulation
concerning the joint action, which would be triggered by a motor
representation of a collective goal of the actions grounding the joint
action; merely having separate motor simulations of each agent’s actions
could not underpin the identification of a joint affordance. This is why
motor representations of collective goals may facilitate coordination in
joint actions not only by enabling the agents to meet relational
constraints on their actions (see <a href="#sec:collective-goal-states"
data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:collective-goal-states">8</a>) but also by enabling
them to perceive joint affordances.</p>
<h1 id="sec:conclusion">Conclusion</h1>
<p>What forms of coordination for joint action enable humans to exercise
shared agency in doing things such as clinking beakers, sharing smiles,
erecting marquees, or producing rhythmic music? We have seen that there
is much diversity. Coordination for joint action includes not only
emergent varieties such as entrainment (see <a href="#sec:entrainment"
data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:entrainment">3</a>)
as well as the forms underpinned by motor simulation (see <a
href="#sec:co-representation" data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:co-representation">4</a>) and task co-representation
(see <a href="#sec:task-co-repr-1" data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:task-co-repr-1">6</a>), but also planned
coordination underpinned by motor representations of collective goals
(see <a href="#sec:collective-goal-states"
data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:collective-goal-states">8</a>). <a href="#fn16"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref16"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a></p>
<p>This diversity in forms of coordination may exist in part because of
a trade-off between flexibility and precision for individual mechanisms
underpinning coordination (see <a
href="#sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff"
data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff">5</a>). Having
multiple mechanisms is useful partly because each makes a different
trade-off between flexibility and precision.</p>
<p>Many exercises of shared agency appear to require both flexibility
and extremely precise coordination. Improvising musicians ideally
achieve temporal synchrony without becoming enslaved to a rhythm. How is
this possible? Exercises of shared agency can depend on multiple forms
of coordination, of course. Individual mechanisms underpinning
coordination may be constrained by the precision–flexibility trade-off,
but this constraint does not apply to a diversity of mechanisms
considered in aggregate. So there is no theoretical obstacle to relying
on highly flexible mechanisms yet achieving extremely precise
coordination. This requires only that diverse mechanisms can have
synergistic effects on coordination.</p>
<p>Just here we encounter the <em>synergy challenge</em>. Achieving
precise coordination in space and time probably demands that mechanisms
underpinning different forms of coordination are to a significant degree
independent of each other (see <a
href="#sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff"
data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff">5</a>). Yet acting
flexibility requires that the different mechanisms sometimes
nonaccidentally operate synergistically—the shared intention, the task
co-representation, and the motor representation of the collective goal
cannot all be pulling in different directions. The challenge is to
understand how, in some situations, mechanisms underpinning different
forms of coordination and which are driven by largely independent
representational structures can nevertheless nonaccidentally have
synergistic effects. Meeting this challenge may require attention to
differences between novices and experts, to why practice is sometimes
necessary, to the effects of common knowledge on moment-by-moment
coordination (see, for example, <span class="citation"
data-cites="richardson:2007_art">(D. C. Richardson, Dale, and Kirkham
2007)</span>), and to phenomenal aspects of coordination (as <span
class="citation" data-cites="keller:2014_rhythm">(Keller, Novembre, and
Hove 2014)</span> hint), among other things. The synergy challenge is
currently a significant obstacle to progress is understanding how high
degrees of flexibility and precision can be combined in the coordination
of joint actions.</p>
<p>Another issue likely to demand future research concerns which, if
any, forms of coordination require postulating novel kinds of
representations or processes specific to shared agency (see <a
href="#sec:collective-goal-states" data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:collective-goal-states">8</a>). Although scientists
sometimes adopt terms from philosophical discussions of collective
intentionality such as ‘shared’ and ‘we-’ representations, the
discoveries about the representations and processes underpinning
coordination reviewed in this chapter do not require representations to
be shared other than in the sense in which barrel organ aficionados
share a taste in music.</p>
<p>One theme in this chapter was that much coordination of joint action
appears to involve not fully distinguishing others’ actions from your
own. Take motor simulation, task co-representation and motor
representation of collective goals. In each case, coordination involves
motor or task representations of actions, tasks or goals that relate
primarily to another’s part in the joint action. This is not a matter of
representing another’s goals or plans as an observer: it is a matter of
preparing actions and representing tasks she will perform in ways that
would also be appropriate if it were you, not her, who was about to
perform them. To a limited but significant extent, then, coordination
involves representing both another’s actions and your own in ways that
give them equal status as parts of a single activity. The existence of
such a perspective on the actions grounding a joint action might just
turn out to matter not only for coordination but also for other aspects
of collective intentionality such as commitment and cooperation. <a
href="#fn17" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref17"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a></p>
<div class="refcontext">

</div>
<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
data-entry-spacing="0" role="list">
<div id="ref-aglioti_action_2008" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Aglioti, Salvatore M, Paola Cesari, Michela Romani, and Cosimo Urgesi.
2008. <span>“Action Anticipation and Motor Resonance in Elite Basketball
Players.”</span> <em>Nature Neuroscience</em> 11 (9): 1109–16. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2182">https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2182</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ambrosini:2011_grasping" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ambrosini, Ettore, Marcello Costantini, and Corrado Sinigaglia. 2011.
<span>“Grasping with the Eyes.”</span> <em>Journal of
Neurophysiology</em> 106 (3): 1437–42. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00118.2011">https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00118.2011</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ambrosini:2012_tie" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ambrosini, Ettore, Corrado Sinigaglia, and Marcello Costantini. 2012.
<span>“Tie My Hands, Tie My Eyes.”</span> <em><span>Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance</span></em> 38
(2): 263–66. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026570">https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026570</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-atmaca:2011_joint" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Atmaca, Silke, Natalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich. 2011. <span>“The
Joint Flanker Effect: Sharing Tasks with Real and Imagined
Co-Actors.”</span> <em>Experimental Brain Research</em> 211 (3-4):
371–85. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-011-2709-9">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-011-2709-9</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-backwell:1998_synchronized" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Backwell, Patricia, Michael Jennions, Neville Passmore, and John
Christy. 1998. <span>“Synchronized Courtship in Fiddler Crabs.”</span>
<em>Nature</em> 391 (6662): 31–32. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/34076">https://doi.org/10.1038/34076</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-baus:2014_predicting" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Baus, Cristina, Natalie Sebanz, Vania de la Fuente, Francesca Martina
Branzi, Clara Martin, and Albert Costa. 2014. <span>“<span
class="nocase">On predicting others’ words: Electrophysiological
evidence of prediction in speech production</span>.”</span>
<em><span>Cognition</span></em> <span>133</span> (2): 395–407. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2014.07.006">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2014.07.006</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-bockler:2012_effects" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Böckler, Anne, Günther Knoblich, and Natalie Sebanz. 2012.
<span>“Effects of a Coactor’s Focus of Attention on Task
Performance.”</span> <em>Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance</em> 38 (6): 1404–15. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027523">https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027523</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1993je" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Bratman, Michael E. 1993. <span>“Shared Intention.”</span>
<em>Ethics</em> 104: 97–113.
</div>
<div id="ref-butterfill:2015_planning" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Butterfill, Stephen A. 2016. <span>“Planning for Collective
Agency.”</span> In <em>Collective Agency and Cooperation in Natural and
Artificial Systems</em>, edited by Catrin Misselhorn, 122:149–68.
Philosophical Studies Series. New York: Springer. <a
href="http://joint-action.butterfill.com/pdf/planning_for_collective_agency.pdf">http://joint-action.butterfill.com/pdf/planning_for_collective_agency.pdf</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-butterfill:2012_intention" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Butterfill, Stephen A., and Corrado Sinigaglia. 2014. <span>“Intention
and Motor Representation in Purposive Action.”</span> <em>Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research</em> 88 (1): 119–45. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1933-1592.2012.00604.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1933-1592.2012.00604.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-cardellicchio:2012_grasping" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Cardellicchio, Pasquale, Corrado Sinigaglia, and Marcello Costantini.
2012. <span>“Grasping Affordances with the Other’s Hand: A
<span>TMS</span> Study.”</span> <em>Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience</em>. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nss017">https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nss017</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Costantini:2012fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Costantini, Marcello, Ettore Ambrosini, Pasquale Cardellicchio, and
Corrado Sinigaglia. 2014. <span>“How Your Hand Drives My Eyes.”</span>
<em>Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience</em> 9 (5): 705–11.
</div>
<div id="ref-davis:2010_perceiving" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Davis, Tehran J., Michael A. Riley, Kevin Shockley, and Sarah
Cummins-Sebree. 2010. <span>“Perceiving Affordances for Joint
Actions.”</span> <em>Perception</em> 39 (12): 1624–44. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1068/p6712">https://doi.org/10.1068/p6712</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-doerrfeld:2012_expecting" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Doerrfeld, Adam, Natalie Sebanz, and Maggie Shiffrar. 2012.
<span>“Expecting to Lift a Box Together Makes the Load Look
Lighter.”</span> <em>Psychological Research</em> 76 (4): 467–75. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00426-011-0398-4">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00426-011-0398-4</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-dolk:2011_how" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Dolk, Thomas, Bernhard Hommel, Lorenza S Colzato, Simone Schütz-Bosbach,
Wolfgang Prinz, and Roman Liepelt. 2011. <span>“How
<span>‘Social’</span> Is the Social Simon Effect?”</span> <em>Frontiers
in Psychology</em> 2. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00084">https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00084</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-dolk:2014_joint" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Dolk, Thomas, Bernhard Hommel, Wolfgang Prinz, and Roman Liepelt. 2014.
<span>“<span class="nocase">The joint flanker effect: Less social than
previously thought</span>.”</span> <em><span>Psychonomic Bulletin &amp;
Review</span></em> <span>21</span> (5): 1224–30. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-014-0583-8">https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-014-0583-8</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Fadiga:2005gq" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Fadiga, Luciano, Laila Craighero, and Etienne Olivier. 2005.
<span>“Human Motor Cortex Excitability During the Perception of Others’
Action.”</span> <em>Current Opinion in Neurobiology</em> 15 (2): 213–18.
</div>
<div id="ref-fairhurst:2013_being" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Fairhurst, Merle T., Petr Janata, and Peter E. Keller. 2013.
<span>“Being and Feeling in Sync with an Adaptive Virtual Partner: Brain
Mechanisms Underlying Dynamic Cooperativity.”</span> <em>Cerebral
Cortex</em> 23 (11): 2592–2600. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs243">https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs243</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Flanagan:2003lm" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Flanagan, J. Randall, and Roland S. Johansson. 2003. <span>“Action Plans
Used in Action Observation.”</span> <em>Nature</em> 424 (6950): 769–71.
</div>
<div id="ref-Fogassi:2005nf" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Fogassi, Leonardo, Pier Francesco Ferrari, Benno Gesierich, Stefano
Rozzi, Fabian Chersi, and Giacomo Rizzolatti. 2005. <span>“Parietal
Lobe: From Action Organization to Intention Understanding.”</span>
<em>Science</em> 308 (5722): 662–67.
</div>
<div id="ref-gallotti:2013_social" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Gallotti, Mattia, and Chris D. Frith. 2013. <span>“Social Cognition in
the We-Mode.”</span> <em>Trends in Cognitive Sciences</em> 17 (4):
160–65. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.002">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.002</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Gangitano:2001ft" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Gangitano, Massimo, Felix M. Mottaghy, and Alvaro Pascual-Leone. 2001.
<span>“Phase-Specific Modulation of Cortical Motor Output During
Movement Observation.”</span> <em>Neuroreport</em> 12 (7): 1489–92.
</div>
<div id="ref-issartel:2007_unintended" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Issartel, Johann, Ludovic Marin, and Marielle Cadopi. 2007.
<span>“Unintended Interpersonal Co-Ordination: <span>‘Can We March to
the Beat of Our Own Drum?’</span>”</span> <em>Neuroscience Letters</em>
411 (3): 174–79. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2006.09.086">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2006.09.086</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-kawato:1999_internal" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kawato, Mitsuo. 1999. <span>“Internal Models for Motor Control and
Trajectory Planning.”</span> <em>Current Opinion in Neurobiology</em> 9
(6): 718–27. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(99)00028-8">https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(99)00028-8</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-keller:2007_pianists" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Keller, Peter E., Günther Knoblich, and Bruno H. Repp. 2007.
<span>“Pianists Duet Better When They Play with Themselves: On the
Possible Role of Action Simulation in Synchronization.”</span>
<em>Consciousness and Cognition</em> 16 (1): 102–11. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2005.12.004">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2005.12.004</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-keller:2014_rhythm" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Keller, Peter E., Giacomo Novembre, and Michael J. Hove. 2014.
<span>“Rhythm in Joint Action: Psychological and Neurophysiological
Mechanisms for Real-Time Interpersonal Coordination.”</span>
<em>Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B:
Biological Sciences</em> 369 (1658): 20130394. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0394">https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0394</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Knoblich:2010fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Knoblich, Günther, Stephen A. Butterfill, and Natalie Sebanz. 2011.
<span>“Psychological Research on Joint Action: Theory and Data.”</span>
In <em>Psychology of Learning and Motivation</em>, edited by Brian Ross,
51:59–101. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-konvalinka:2010_follow" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Konvalinka, Ivana, Peter Vuust, Andreas Roepstorff, and Chris D. Frith.
2010. <span>“Follow You, Follow Me: Continuous Mutual Prediction and
Adaptation in Joint Tapping.”</span> <em>The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology</em> 63 (11): 2220–30. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2010.497843">https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2010.497843</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-kourtis:2012_predictive" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kourtis, Dimitrios, Natalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich. 2013.
<span>“Predictive Representation of Other People’s Actions in Joint
Action Planning: An <span>EEG</span> Study.”</span> <em>Social
Neuroscience</em> 8 (1): 31–42. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2012.694823">https://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2012.694823</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-loehr:2013_monitoring" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Loehr, Janeen D, Dimitrios Kourtis, Cordula Vesper, Natalie Sebanz, and
Günther Knoblich. 2013. <span>“Monitoring Individual and Joint Action
Outcomes in Duet Music Performance.”</span> <em>Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience</em> 25 (7): 1049–61.
</div>
<div id="ref-loehr:2011_temporal" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Loehr, Janeen D, and Caroline Palmer. 2011. <span>“Temporal Coordination
Between Performing Musicians.”</span> <em>The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology</em> 64 (11): 2153–67.
</div>
<div id="ref-loehr:2015_sound" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Loehr, Janeen D., and Cordula Vesper. 2015. <span>“The Sound of You and
Me: Novices Represent Shared Goals in Joint Action.”</span> <em>The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology</em> 0 (ja): 1–30. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1061029">https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1061029</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-marsh_social_2009" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Marsh, Kerry L., Michael J. Richardson, and Richard C. Schmidt. 2009.
<span>“Social Connection Through Joint Action and Interpersonal
Coordination.”</span> <em>Topics in Cognitive Science</em> 1 (2):
320–39. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01022.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01022.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Menoret:2013fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ménoret, Mathilde, L. Varnet, R. Fargier, A. Cheylus, A. Curie, V. des
Portes, T. A. Nazir, and Y. Paulignan. 2014. <span>“Neural Correlates of
Non-Verbal Social Interactions: A Dual-EEG Study.”</span>
<em>Neuropsychologia</em> 55: 75–97.
</div>
<div id="ref-merker:2009_role" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Merker, Bjorn H., Guy S. Madison, and Patricia Eckerdal. 2009. <span>“On
the Role and Origin of Isochrony in Human Rhythmic Entrainment.”</span>
<em>Cortex</em>, Special issue on <span>“the rhythmic brain,”</span> 45
(1): 4–17. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2008.06.011">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2008.06.011</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-meyer:2011_joint" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Meyer, Marlene, Sabine Hunnius, Michiel van Elk, Freek van Ede, and
Harold Bekkering. 2011. <span>“Joint Action Modulates Motor System
Involvement During Action Observation in 3-Year-Olds.”</span>
<em>Experimental Brain Research</em> 211 (3-4): 581–92. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-011-2658-3">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-011-2658-3</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-meyer:2013_higher-order" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Meyer, Marlene, Robrecht P. R. D. van der Wel, and Sabine Hunnius. 2013.
<span>“Higher-Order Action Planning for Individual and Joint Object
Manipulations.”</span> <em>Experimental Brain Research</em> 225 (4):
579–88. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3398-8">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3398-8</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-miles:2010_too" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Miles, Lynden K., Jordan L. Griffiths, Michael J. Richardson, and C.
Neil Macrae. 2010. <span>“Too Late to Coordinate: Contextual Influences
on Behavioral Synchrony.”</span> <em>European Journal of Social
Psychology</em> 40 (1): 52–60. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.721">https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.721</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-neda:2000_self" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Néda, Z., E. Ravasz, Y. Brechet, T. Vicsek, and A.-L. Barabási. 2000.
<span>“Self-Organizing Processes: The Sound of Many Hands
Clapping.”</span> <em>Nature</em> 403 (6772): 849–50. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/35002660">https://doi.org/10.1038/35002660</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-nessler:2009_interpersonal" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Nessler, Jeff A., and Sara J. Gilliland. 2009. <span>“Interpersonal
Synchronization During Side by Side Treadmill Walking Is Influenced by
Leg Length Differential and Altered Sensory Feedback.”</span> <em>Human
Movement Science</em> 28 (6): 772–85. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2009.04.007">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2009.04.007</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-novembre:2013_motor" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Novembre, G., L. F. Ticini, S. Schutz-Bosbach, and P. E. Keller. 2014.
<span>“Motor Simulation and the Coordination of Self and Other in
Real-Time Joint Action.”</span> <em>Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience</em> 9 (8): 1062–68. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst086">https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst086</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-pacherie:2008_action" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Pacherie, Elisabeth. 2008. <span>“The Phenomenology of Action: A
Conceptual Framework.”</span> <em>Cognition</em> 107 (1): 179–217. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2007.09.003">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2007.09.003</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-pietroski_actions_1998" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Pietroski, Paul M. 1998. <span>“Actions, Adjuncts, and Agency.”</span>
<em>Mind</em>, New series, 107 (425): 73–111. <a
href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/2659808">http://www.jstor.org/stable/2659808</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-prinz:1997_perception" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Prinz, Wolfgang. 1997. <span>“Perception and Action Planning.”</span>
<em>European Journal of Cognitive Psychology</em> 9 (2): 129–54. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/713752551">https://doi.org/10.1080/713752551</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ramenzoni:2014_scaling" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ramenzoni, Verónica C., Natalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich. 2014.
<span>“Scaling up Perception<span></span>action Links: Evidence from
Synchronization with Individual and Joint Action.”</span> <em>Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance</em> 40 (4):
1551–65. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036925">https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036925</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-repp:2000_compensation" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Repp, Bruno H. 2000. <span>“Compensation for Subliminal Timing
Perturbations in Perceptual-Motor Synchronization.”</span>
<em>Psychological Research</em> 63 (2): 106–28. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/PL00008170">https://doi.org/10.1007/PL00008170</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-repp:2005_sensorimotor" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2005. <span>“Sensorimotor Synchronization: A Review of the Tapping
Literature.”</span> <em>Psychonomic Bulletin &amp; Review</em> 12 (6):
969–92. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03206433">https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03206433</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-repp:2008_sensorimotor" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Repp, Bruno H., and Peter E. Keller. 2008. <span>“Sensorimotor
Synchronization with Adaptively Timed Sequences.”</span> <em>Human
Movement Science</em> 27 (3): 423–56. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2008.02.016">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2008.02.016</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-repp:2007_action" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Repp, Bruno H., and Günther Knoblich. 2007. <span>“Action Can Affect
Auditory Perception.”</span> <em>Psychological Science</em> 18 (1): 6–7.
<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01839.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01839.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-repp:2009_performed" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2009. <span>“Performed or Observed Keyboard Actions Affect
Pianists’ Judgements of Relative Pitch.”</span> <em>The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology</em> 62 (11): 2156–70. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/17470210902745009">https://doi.org/10.1080/17470210902745009</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-repp:2013_sensorimotor" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Repp, Bruno H., and Yi-Huang Su. 2013. <span>“Sensorimotor
Synchronization: A Review of Recent Research
(2006<span></span>2012).”</span> <em>Psychonomic Bulletin &amp;
Review</em> 20 (3): 403–52. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-012-0371-2">https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-012-0371-2</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-richardson_looking_2005" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Richardson, Daniel C., and Rick Dale. 2005. <span>“Looking to
Understand: The Coupling Between Speakers’ and Listeners’ Eye Movements
and Its Relationship to Discourse Comprehension.”</span> <em>Cognitive
Science</em> 29 (6): 1045–60. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1207/s15516709cog0000_29">https://doi.org/10.1207/s15516709cog0000_29</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-richardson:2007_art" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Richardson, Daniel C., Rick Dale, and Natasha Z. Kirkham. 2007.
<span>“The Art of Conversation Is Coordination Common Ground and the
Coupling of Eye Movements During Dialogue.”</span> <em>Psychological
Science</em> 18 (5): 407–13. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01914.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01914.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-richardson:2008_synchrony" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Richardson, Daniel, Rick Dale &amp; Schockley, and Kevin. 2008.
<span>“Synchrony and Swing in Conversation: Coordination, Temporal
Dynamics and Communication.”</span> In <em>Embodied Communication in
Humans and Machines</em>, edited by Ipke Wachsmuth, Manuela Lenzen, and
Günther Knoblich. Oup Oxford.
</div>
<div id="ref-richardson:2005_effects" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Richardson, Michael J., Kerry L. Marsh, and Richard C. Schmidt. 2005.
<span>“Effects of Visual and Verbal Interaction on Unintentional
Interpersonal Coordination.”</span> <em>Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance</em> 31 (1): 62–79. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.31.1.62">https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.31.1.62</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-richardson_judging_2007" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Richardson, Michael J, Kerry L Marsh, and Reuben M Baron. 2007.
<span>“Judging and Actualizing Intrapersonal and Interpersonal
Affordances.”</span> <em>Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance. Vol. 33(4)</em> 33 (4): 845–59.
</div>
<div id="ref-rizzolatti_functional_2010" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Rizzolatti, Giacomo, and Corrado Sinigaglia. 2010. <span>“The Functional
Role of the Parieto-Frontal Mirror Circuit: Interpretations and
Misinterpretations.”</span> <em>Nature Reviews: Neuroscience</em> 11
(4): 264–74. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2805">https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2805</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-rosenbaum:2010_human" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Rosenbaum, David A. 2009. <em>Human Motor Control</em>. 2nd ed. San
Diego, <span>CA</span>, <span>US</span>: Academic Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-Rotman:2006xf" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Rotman, Gerben, Nikolaus F. Troje, Roland S. Johansson, and J. Randall
Flanagan. 2006. <span>“Eye Movements When Observing Predictable and
Unpredictable Actions.”</span> <em>J Neurophysiol</em> 96 (3): 1358–69.
</div>
<div id="ref-schulze:2005_keeping" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Schulze, Hans-Henning, Andreas Cordes, and Dirk Vorberg. 2005.
<span>“Keeping Synchrony While Tempo Changes: Accelerando and
Ritardando.”</span> <em>Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary
Journal</em> 22 (3): 461–77. <a
href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/mp.2005.22.3.461">http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/mp.2005.22.3.461</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Sebanz:2006yq" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sebanz, Natalie, Harold Bekkering, and Günther Knoblich. 2006.
<span>“Joint Action: Bodies and Mind Moving Together.”</span> <em>Trends
in Cognitive Sciences</em> 10 (2): 70–76.
</div>
<div id="ref-Sebanz:2005fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sebanz, Natalie, Günther Knoblich, and W. Prinz. 2005. <span>“How Two
Share a Task: Corepresenting Stimulus-Response Mappings.”</span>
<em>Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance</em> 31 (6): 1234–46. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.31.6.1234">https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.31.6.1234</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-sebanz:2006_twin_peaks" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sebanz, Natalie, Günther Knoblich, Wolfgang Prinz, and Edmund Wascher.
2006. <span>“Twin Peaks: An <span>ERP</span> Study of Action Planning
and Control in Coacting Individuals.”</span> <em>Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience</em> 18 (5): 859–70. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.5.859">https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.5.859</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-shockley:2009_conversation" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Shockley, Kevin, Daniel C. Richardson, and Rick Dale. 2009.
<span>“Conversation and Coordinative Structures.”</span> <em>Topics in
Cognitive Science</em> 1 (2): 305–19. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01021.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01021.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-shockley:2003_mutual" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Shockley, Kevin, Marie-Vee Santana, and Carol A. Fowler. 2003.
<span>“Mutual Interpersonal Postural Constraints Are Involved in
Cooperative Conversation.”</span> <em>Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance</em> 29 (2): 326–32. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.29.2.326">https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.29.2.326</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-sinigaglia:2015_puzzle" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sinigaglia, Corrado, and Stephen A. Butterfill. 2015. <span>“On a Puzzle
about Relations Between Thought, Experience and the Motoric.”</span>
<em>Synthese</em> 192 (6): 1923–36. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-015-0672-x">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-015-0672-x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-tsai:2008_action" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Tsai, Chia-Chin, Wen-Jui Kuo, Daisy L. Hung, and Ovid J. L. Tzeng. 2008.
<span>“Action Co-Representation Is Tuned to Other Humans.”</span>
<em>Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience</em> 20 (11): 2015–24. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2008.20144">https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2008.20144</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-tsai:2011_groop_effect" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Tsai, Jessica Chia-Chin, Natalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich. 2011.
<span>“The <span>GROOP</span> Effect: Groups Mimic Group
Actions.”</span> <em>Cognition</em> 118 (1): 135–40. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.10.007">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.10.007</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-vanulzen:2008_characteristics" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Ulzen, Niek R. van, Claudine J. C. Lamoth, Andreas Daffertshofer, Gün R.
Semin, and Peter J. Beek. 2008. <span>“Characteristics of Instructed and
Uninstructed Interpersonal Coordination While Walking
Side-by-Side.”</span> <em>Neuroscience Letters</em> 432 (2): 88–93. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2007.11.070">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2007.11.070</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-varlet:2015_informational" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Varlet, Manuel, Colleen Bucci, Michael J. Richardson, and Richard C.
Schmidt. 2015. <span>“Informational Constraints on Spontaneous
Visuomotor Entrainment.”</span> <em>Human Movement Science</em> 41:
265–81. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2015.03.011">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2015.03.011</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-vesper_minimal_2010" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Vesper, Cordula, Stephen Butterfill, Günther Knoblich, and Natalie
Sebanz. 2010. <span>“A Minimal Architecture for Joint Action.”</span>
<em>Neural Networks</em> 23 (8-9): 998–1003. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2010.06.002">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2010.06.002</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-vesper:2012_jumping" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Vesper, Cordula, Robrecht P. R. D. van der Wel, Günther Knoblich, and
Natalie Sebanz. 2013. <span>“Are You Ready to Jump? Predictive
Mechanisms in Interpersonal Coordination.”</span> <em>Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance</em> 39 (1):
48–61. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028066">https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028066</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-wel:2015_entrainment" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Wel, Robrecht P. R. D. van der, and En Fu. 2015. <span>“Entrainment and
Task Co-Representation Effects for Discrete and Continuous Action
Sequences.”</span> <em>Psychonomic Bulletin &amp; Review</em>, 1–7. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-015-0831-6">https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-015-0831-6</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-wenke:2011_what" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Wenke, Dorit, Silke Atmaca, Antje Holländer, Roman Liepelt, Pamela
Baess, and Wolfgang Prinz. 2011. <span>“What Is Shared in Joint Action?
Issues of Co-Representation, Response Conflict, and Agent
Identification.”</span> <em>Review of Philosophy and Psychology</em> 2
(2): 147–72. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-011-0057-0">https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-011-0057-0</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Wilson:2005qu" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Wilson, Margaret, and Günther Knoblich. 2005. <span>“The Case for Motor
Involvement in Perceiving Conspecifics.”</span> <em>Psychological
Bulletin</em> 131 (3): 460–73.
</div>
<div id="ref-Wolpert:2003mg" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Wolpert, Daniel M., Kenji Doya, and Mitsuo Kawato. 2003. <span>“A
Unifying Computational Framework for Motor Control and Social
Interaction.”</span> <em>Philosophical Transactions: Biological
Sciences</em> 358 (1431): 593–602. <a
href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/3558137">http://www.jstor.org/stable/3558137</a>.
</div>
</div>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1"><p>Events <span
class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub>1</sub></span>, ... <span
class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub><em>n</em></sub></span>
<em>ground</em> <span class="math inline"><em>E</em></span> just if:
<span class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub>1</sub></span>, ... <span
class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub><em>n</em></sub></span> and <span
class="math inline"><em>E</em></span> occur; <span
class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub>1</sub></span>, ... <span
class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub><em>n</em></sub></span> are each part
of <span class="math inline"><em>E</em></span>; and every event that is
a part of <span class="math inline"><em>E</em></span> but does not
overlap <span class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub>1</sub></span>,
... <span class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub><em>n</em></sub></span> is
caused by some or all of <span
class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub>1</sub></span>, ... <span
class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub><em>n</em></sub></span>. (This is a
generalisation of the notion specified by <span class="citation"
data-cites="pietroski_actions_1998">(Pietroski 1998)</span>.)<a
href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn2"><p>Note that what follows is neutral on whether joint
actions are actions. As a terminological stipulation, I shall say that
an individual is an <em>agent of a joint action</em> just if she is an
agent of an action which, together with some other events, grounds this
joint action. (Depending on your views about events, causation and
agents, getting some edge cases right may require adding that for this
individual to be an agent of this joint action, this particular
plurality of grounding events—her action and the other events—must
include actions with agents other than her.)<a href="#fnref2"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn3"><p>See <span class="citation"
data-cites="schulze:2005_keeping">Schulze, Cordes, and Vorberg (2005,
474–76)</span>. <span class="citation"
data-cites="keller:2014_rhythm">Keller, Novembre, and Hove (2014)</span>
suggest, further, that the two kinds of adjustment involve different
brain networks. Note that this view is currently controversial: <span
class="citation" data-cites="loehr:2011_temporal">Janeen D. Loehr and
Palmer (2011)</span> could be interpreted as providing evidence for a
different account of how entrainment is maintained.<a href="#fnref3"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn4"><p>See, for example, <span class="citation"
data-cites="richardson_looking_2005">D. C. Richardson and Dale
(2005)</span>. For relatively speculative discussions, see <span
class="citation"
data-cites="richardson:2008_synchrony merker:2009_role keller:2014_rhythm">D.
Richardson, Schockley, and Kevin (2008; Merker, Madison, and Eckerdal
2009; Keller, Novembre, and Hove 2014, sec. 4)</span>.<a href="#fnref4"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn5"><p><span class="citation"
data-cites="Gangitano:2001ft">Gangitano, Mottaghy, and Pascual-Leone
(2001)</span>; see further <span class="citation"
data-cites="Fadiga:2005gq ambrosini:2012_tie">Fadiga, Craighero, and
Olivier (2005; Ambrosini, Sinigaglia, and Costantini 2012)</span>. For a
review of evidence that, when observing an action, motor processes and
representations occur in the observer like those which would occur if
she were performing an action of the kind observed rather than merely
observing it, see <span class="citation"
data-cites="rizzolatti_functional_2010">Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia
(2010)</span>.<a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn6"><p>For evidence that motor simulation also enables
coordination in musical performances, see <span class="citation"
data-cites="keller:2007_pianists loehr:2011_temporal novembre:2013_motor">Keller,
Knoblich, and Repp (2007; Janeen D. Loehr and Palmer 2011; Novembre et
al. 2014)</span>. <span id="fn:pianist-motor"
data-label="fn:pianist-motor"></span> For evidence on development, see
<span class="citation" data-cites="meyer:2011_joint">Meyer et al.
(2011)</span>’s investigation of motor processes and coordination in
three-year-old children.<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn7"><p>For more detailed arguments that some motor
representations are goal-states, see <span class="citation"
data-cites="prinz:1997_perception">Prinz (1997, 143–46)</span>, <span
class="citation" data-cites="pacherie:2008_action">Pacherie
(2008)</span> and <span class="citation"
data-cites="butterfill:2012_intention">Butterfill and Sinigaglia
(2014)</span>.<a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn8"><p>This definition needs refining in various ways not
directly relevant to the present discussion.<a href="#fnref8"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn9"><p><span class="citation"
data-cites="wenke:2011_what">Wenke et al. (2011)</span> and <span
class="citation" data-cites="dolk:2011_how dolk:2014_joint">Dolk et al.
(2011, 2014)</span> have defended hypotheses which, if true, would
enable some of the evidence for these predictions to be explained
without accepting the task co-representation hypothesis.<a
href="#fnref9" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn10"><p>The insects’ behaviours cannot be regarded as directed
to raising a brood just in virtue of each individual insect behaviour
being so directed because there is (typically, at least) a division of
labour.<a href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn11"><p>Note that, despite the name, planned coordination does
not by definition involve planning.<a href="#fnref11"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn12"><p>Some forms of entrainment are probably a hybrid of
emergent and planned coordination since, as we saw in <a
href="#sec:entrainment" data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:entrainment">3</a>, the precision with which
entrained actions are synchronised can be influenced by the agents’
intentions concerning coordination and therefore probably also by
collective goal-states.<a href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn13"><p>Further evidence for motor representations of
collective goals is provided by <span class="citation"
data-cites="tsai:2011_groop_effect ramenzoni:2014_scaling Menoret:2013fk">J.
C.-C. Tsai, Sebanz, and Knoblich (2011; Ramenzoni, Sebanz, and Knoblich
2014; Ménoret et al. 2014)</span> and <span class="citation"
data-cites="meyer:2013_higher-order">Meyer, Wel, and Hunnius
(2013)</span>.<a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn14"><p>The notion of a collective goal was introduced in <a
href="#sec:emergent-vs-planned" data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:emergent-vs-planned">7</a>; evidence for the
existence of motor representations of collective goals was discussed in
<a href="#sec:collective-goal-states" data-reference-type="ref+label"
data-reference="sec:collective-goal-states">8</a>.<a href="#fnref14"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn15"><p>See <span class="citation"
data-cites="richardson_judging_2007">Michael J. Richardson, Marsh, and
Baron (2007)</span> for a further study involving jointly lifting
planks.<a href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn16"><p>This is not a comprehensive list. Relevant reviews
include <span class="citation"
data-cites="Knoblich:2010fk keller:2014_rhythm marsh_social_2009">Knoblich,
Butterfill, and Sebanz (2011; Keller, Novembre, and Hove 2014; Marsh,
Richardson, and Schmidt 2009)</span>.<a href="#fnref16"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn17"><p>ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. I have benefitted immeasurably from
extended collaborations with Natalie Sebanz, Guenther Knoblich and
Corrado Sinigaglia as well as from shorter (so far) collaborations with
Cordula Vesper and Lincoln Colling. I am also indebted to many people
for discussion. Thank you!</p>
<p>BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE. Stephen Butterfill researches and teaches on joint
action, mindreading and other philosophical issues in cognitive science
at the University of Warwick (UK).<a href="#fnref17"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
</ol>
</section>

</div>