--- 
title: "Three strategies for shared intention: plural, aggregate and reductive"
authors: "Butterfill, Stephen A."
year: 2025
journal: "Philosophical Psychology"
volume: "38"
number: "5"
pages: "1909--1931"
doi: "10.1080/09515089.2025.2490242"
bibtex: "@article{butterfill:2025_three,\n    doi = {10.1080/09515089.2025.2490242},\n    url = {https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2025.2490242},\n    note = {[Online; accessed 2025-08-15]},\n    author = {Butterfill, Stephen A.},\n    journal = {Philosophical Psychology},\n    issn = {0951-5089},\n    number = {5},\n    year = {2025},\n    month = {jul 4},\n    pages = {1909--1931},\n    publisher = {Routledge},\n    title = {Three strategies for shared intention: plural, aggregate and reductive},\n    volume = {38}\n}\n\n"
pdfUrl: "/pdf/butterfill2025_three.pdf"
---

<div class="fulltext">
<h1 id="sec:introduction">Introduction</h1>
<p>Start with the idea that shared intention, whatever that is, is
something which makes things we do together the genuinely joint
activities they are. We manifest shared intention in walking together,
playing a piano duet, or painting a house together. Philosophers, in
attempting to elucidate ideas about shared intention, have followed
three distinct strategies. One involves plural subjects, one aggregate
subjects,<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> and one a reduction of the
apparently plural or aggregate to the merely individual.<a href="#fn2"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>
Whereas these strategies are usually presented as conflicting attempts
to characterise a single set of phenomena, my thesis is that for each
strategy there are phenomena which can be correctly characterised only
by following that strategy.</p>
<p>This thesis is not entirely novel. Both <span class="citation"
data-cites="list_pettit:2011">List and Pettit (2011)</span> and <span
class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2022_shared">Bratman
(2022a)</span>, for instance, have developed views on which, roughly
speaking, a reductive strategy is applied to small-scale, informal
interactions whereas the aggregate strategy is applied to corporate or
institutional agents.<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> My thesis is that, similarly, a
combination of strategies may be needed even when restricting attention
to small-scale interactions involving two or three people.</p>
<p>What consequences would follow from this thesis if true—if, that is,
each of the three strategies is needed to characterise some phenomena
associated with shared intention? This would make things easier in one
way: it is not necessary for proponents of one strategy to refute the
theories invented by those following a different strategy. This would be
a good outcome because, despite much effort, few if any existing
attempts to refute particular theories of shared intention are widely
regarded as successful. But it would also make things harder in another
way. For if there is not one set of things that the different theories
are aiming to fully capture, then it will not be possible to specify the
target of a theory simply by reference to shared intention. We will need
a deeper understanding of what each particular theory is aiming to
explain.</p>
<p>Superficially, the need for a deeper understanding of targets of
explanation might not seem like much of a challenge. After all, we
already know that some theorists primarily target semantics <span
class="citation" data-cites="ludwig_collective_2007">(Ludwig
2007)</span>, others ‘the deep structure of our thought about acting
together’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert:2022_simple">(Gilbert 2022, 2)</span>, and yet
others ‘the explanatory structures that directly underlie [...] cases of
acting together’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2022_planning">(Bratman 2022b, 7)</span>. There are,
then, already things written about what theories of shared intention aim
to explain. Yet little attention has been given to the possibility of
co-existence. The usual assumption is that the various strategies lead
to theories which do contradict each other; or else, more rarely, that
multiple strategies can be combined in pursuit of a single explanatory
target.</p>
<p>We already know that it is coherent to pursue a combination of
strategies because some have already done this. <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">Bratman (2014, 127ff)</span>, for
example, considers the possibility that his reductive strategy yields a
theory on which there are also what he calls ‘group agents’ (for which I
shall use the term ‘aggregate agents’; see section <a
href="#sec:aggregate" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:aggregate">5</a>). This is a relatively conservative
way of combining strategies. Not only is there a single explanatory
target, but the group agents are merely epiphenomena of the reductive
strategy. The novel feature of what follows is the observation that
different explanatory targets require different strategies, which, as we
will see, appears to create a challenge to understanding
co-existence.</p>
<p>If, as the following argues, multiple different strategies for shared
intention really are needed, then we all face a problem. The problem is
that we, as researchers, need, but lack, a common understanding of what
theories of shared intention are theories of.</p>
<h1 id="sec:live-it-out">Living Out a Theory</h1>
<p>My thesis is that, for each strategy for explicating shared
intention, there are phenomena which can be correctly characterised only
by following that strategy. The argument for this thesis (in section <a
href="#sec:multiple-strategies" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:multiple-strategies">8</a>) will hinge on the idea
that it is possible, in some cases, to make a theory true by living it
out. To avoid surprises later, this section introduces that idea.</p>
<p>While laws of mechanics apply no less to us agents than to anything
else, it would usually be futile, perhaps even incoherent, to attempt to
move according to these laws. By contrast, one of the roles of mental
state attribution is to provide norms which individuals can measure
themselves against and aim to live by <span class="citation"
data-cites="mcgeer:2007_regulative zawidzki:2013_mindshaping">(McGeer
2007; Zawidzki 2013)</span>.</p>
<p>To illustrate, consider the norm of agglomeration: it is a mistake to
knowingly have several intentions if it would be a mistake to knowingly
have one large intention agglomerating the several intentions (<span
class="citation" data-cites="Bratman:1987xw">(Bratman 1987)</span>).
Whether this is actually a mistake is controversial—several philosophers
have defended views of intention which are incompatible with it <span
class="citation" data-cites="setiya:2022_intention">(Setiya 2022, sec.
4)</span>. But regardless of that, it is possible some people might,
however mistakenly, take agglomeration as an ideal by which to live.
They check their intentions against the norm and criticise each other
for failing to implement it. It is equally possible that another group
of people, having considered the matter deeply, intentionally disregard
the norm of agglomeration. In their view, adhering to this norm would be
a mistake.</p>
<p>The possibility that some ordinary agents might adopt or reject the
norm of agglomeration in practice raises a question. Are ordinary
agents’ views ever relevant to whether the norm is correct? Imagine we
were to say, crudely, that whether the norm holds is just a matter of
whether people take it to hold. Such a view faces myriad challenges. One
is to accommodate the fact that ordinary agents are wrong about norms,
at least occasionally (as the present author can attest). Another
challenge is to avoid a regress. This is not a line I propose to
develop. Alternatively, one might take a hard line and insist that
ordinary agents’ views are irrelevant to whether the norm of
agglomeration holds. Taking this line is complicated by the fact that
ordinary agents’ views shape at least some of their thoughts and
actions. Their views are not idle speculations about themselves but can
form ideals which they attempt to live out. Someone who takes the hard
line cannot therefore claim to be explaining how ordinary agents think
or act. Minimally, then, anyone pursuing this line would have to
identify which phenomena their position is supposed to explain. A
further challenge is that philosophers’ methods involve intuition,
imagination and reasoning about consistency. These methods are good for
identifying possible ways things could be. But where there are multiple
theoretically coherent positions on which fully-informed ordinary agents
reasonably differ, these methods are not likely to yield insight into
how things actually are.</p>
<p>Resolving the issue of how, if at all, ordinary agents’ views are
relevant to the correctness of the norm of agglomeration is beyond
anything I can offer here (or anywhere else). But for our purposes, what
matters is a relatively uncontroversial point. There is a difference
between, on the one hand, things which are merely described and
predicted by a set of attributions and, on the other hand, agents who
are attempting to live out a set of attributions together with some
norms governing them. You might have a view about how combinations of
yeast, sugar and heat can be used to influence how dough rises, but the
dough itself has no perspective. And even if the dough achieved
self-awareness, that would matter only insofar as its self-awareness
influenced variables you care about. When ascribing attitudes and norms
to agents, by contrast, philosophers are not required to adopt the
outsiders’ perspective—they can also take into account the agents’ own
perspective.</p>
<p>Characterising intentions and norms from some agents’ own perspective
is a familiar and coherent philosophical project. Where some agents are
attempting to live out a theory, it is reasonable to accept, in the
absence of overriding reasons such as incoherence, ignorance or
inertness, that the theory could be true of them.</p>
<p>Perhaps this will seem too hypothetical to be worth taking seriously.
We have no idea which, if any, ordinary agents aim to live by the norm
of agglomeration and which, if any, aim not to. My sense, however, is
that philosophical theories are not supposed to depend on any such
facts. They are, after all, usually developed independently of any
investigation into what ordinary agents think.<a href="#fn4"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a></p>
<p>Not that it has to be hypothetical. Consider the familiar distinction
between revealed and stated preferences. To illustrate, in investigating
the value people place on a life, we could observe how much less people
pay to own a house near a known source of carcinogenic pollution. Or,
alternatively, we could give them a questionnaire asking how much they
would pay to eliminate the same risk. A wide range of research has
examined how revealed and stated preferences diverge (<span
class="citation"
data-cites="carson:1996_contingent alberini:2019_revealed">(Carson et
al. 1996; Alberini 2019)</span>, for example). There is also research on
the factors that ‘often create a wedge between revealed and normative
preferences’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="beshears:2008_how">(Beshears et al. 2008, 1788)</span>.
Divergences between revealed and stated preferences matter in practice
because they create difficult questions for policy makers on how much to
invest in preventing deaths. For our, more theoretical purposes, the
divergence illustrates how understanding agents’ actions requires taking
into account their own perspectives. Agents’ stated preferences are
views about how a model applies to them. Because agents sometimes aim to
live out these views, they are not inert commentary. The problem is not
fundamentally that this complicates predicting behaviour. It is that
where agents aim to conform to a model, incorrect predictions do not
have the same significance.</p>
<p>The distinction between revealed and stated preferences illustrates
the dual role of theories of attitudes and norms, in prediction and in
offering ideals which people can attempt to live out. There is a
difference between, on the one hand, things which are merely described
and predicted by a set of attributions and, on the other hand, agents
who are are attempting to live out a set of attributions together with
some laws governing them. In the latter case, the agents’ aiming to live
out a theory is a reason not to reject that theory insofar our aims
include understanding the agents’ own perspective.</p>
<p>The argument that follows is an attempt to apply this general point
to philosophical theories of shared intention. My aim is to show that
for each of the three strategies for shared intention—plural, aggregate
and reductive—there is at least one consistent theory following this
strategy which it is possible for people to intentionally live out. This
thesis is probably either too odd or too obvious to be interesting in
its own right, but I will suggest that it has consequences which
complicate existing attempts to understand shared intention. As these
consequences depend on the aims of a theory of shared intention, I start
with the aims.</p>
<h1 id="sec:background">Background on Shared Intention</h1>
<p>Why do we need a notion of shared intention at all? Because it is
what distinguishes genuinely joint activities from things people do in
parallel but merely individually <span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert_walking_1990 bratman:2022_planning">(Gilbert 1990;
Bratman 2022b)</span>. This is, of course, at most a partial answer. The
hope is that investigating a notion such as shared intention will enable
us, eventually, to ‘discover the nature of social groups in general’
<span class="citation" data-cites="gilbert_walking_1990">(Gilbert 1990,
2)</span> and to understand the conceptual, metaphysical and normative
aspects of basic forms of sociality <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014, 3)</span>. But one route
to these lofty goals is to focus on distinguishing genuinely joint from
merely parallel activities in mundane cases involving two or three
people.</p>
<p>Ayesha and Ahmed have spent the morning in the kitchen washing the
dishes together. This is a paradigm case of joint activity. We can
contrast Ayesha and Ahmed’s activities with those of two anti-social
people who act in parallel but merely individually. The idea is that
these other, anti-social people wash the dishes side-by-side, but their
actions are merely performed in parallel and so do not involve any joint
activity. What distinguishes Ayesha and Ahmed’s activities from these
other people’s?</p>
<p>A temptingly simple idea is to appeal to coordination. Could Ayesha
and Ahmed’s activities be distinguished by virtue of being coordinated?
The obstacle is that acting in parallel can also involve coordination.
The actions of the other, anti-social people, who are merely acting in
parallel, may nevertheless need to be tightly coordinated because space
in their communal kitchen is limited. They may also politely anticipate
each other’s movements and work around them. Mere coordination, then,
cannot distinguish joint activity.</p>
<p>The failure of this and other simple ideas hints that distinguishing
joint activities from their parallel but merely individual counterparts
is a deep and difficult problem. This problem is a variant of one about
ordinary, individual action. The ‘Problem of Action’ is to distinguish a
person’s actions from things that merely happen to them <span
class="citation" data-cites="frankfurt1978problem">(Frankfurt
1978)</span>. If ordinary, individual intention is key to solving that
problem, perhaps some joint counterpart of intention is the key to
solving the problem of joint action. This motivates using the term
<em>shared intention</em> to label whatever the normative or
psychological structure is needed to distinguish joint activities from
things people do in parallel but merely individually.</p>
<p>Introducing a label for the problem does not take us very far towards
a solution. The problem now becomes to say what shared intention is. One
possibility is the plural subject strategy: shared intention is a matter
of there being one mental state with two or more subjects.</p>
<h1 id="sec:plural">The Plural Subject Strategy</h1>
<p>A plural subject is two or more people who are each among the
subjects of a single intention or other mental state.</p>
<p>The difficulty of understanding the plural subject strategy is mainly
that it is so simple. Intentions and other mental states involve
subjects, attitudes and contents. The content is what distinguishes two
intentions from each other—the intention to cook dinner from the
intention to go for a walk, say, differ in content. Attitude is what
distinguishes intentions from other mental states—the intention to go
for a walk differs in attitude from the desire to go for a walk. And the
subject is what distinguishes your mental states from mine. The idea of
the plural subject strategy is just that intentions can have more than
one subject. You and I can share an intention in the same sense that
siblings share a parent. Your intention to walk may also be my intention
to walk: you and I are equally subjects of this intention.</p>
<p>It is helpful, in thinking about the contrast between individual and
plural subjects, to draw on a related distinction between distributive
and collective interpretations of sentences. Consider these
sentences:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>The fans left the stadium.</p></li>
<li><p>The fans completely blocked the road. <span
id="item:fans-blocking" label="item:fans-blocking"></span></p></li>
</ol>
<p>The first sentence is naturally read distributively: it is a matter
of each fan individually leaving. But the second sentence is naturally
read collectively. As the road is very wide, not even the largest
individual fan did much at all to block the road. But because so many
fans were milling around in the road, it was impossible to traverse it.
So understood, the second sentence’s truth is not, or not only, a matter
of each fan individually blocking the road. This is a collective
reading. The distinction seems applicable to sentences about
intention:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>The twins intended to win the race. <span
id="item:twins-intention" label="item:twins-intention"></span></p></li>
</ol>
<p>If we imagine a race that can only have one winner, a 100 meter
sprint, say, then it is natural to read this sentence distributively.
Its truth is just a matter of each twin intending to win the race. But
if we imagine the twins running in a three-legged race together, it
seems possible to read the sentence collectively. On this reading, there
is one intention whose subject is the twins. They are, to put it
colourfully, of one mind.</p>
<p>We can describe the twins as a <em>plural subject</em>. But note that
the plural subject is nothing other than the twins themselves. We must
avoid confusion on this point in order to distinguish plural subjects
from aggregate subjects, which are fundamentally different (more on this
in section <a href="#sec:aggregate" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:aggregate">5</a>).</p>
<p>The plural subject strategy requires no novel conceptual,
metaphysical or normative ingredients over and above those already
required in a theory of ordinary, individual action—it can be
implemented in ways that respect Bratman’s continuity thesis. <a
href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> Just as the truth of the collective
reading of (<a href="#item:fans-blocking" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="item:fans-blocking">[item:fans-blocking]</a>) () does
not require anything other than the fans to mill in the road, so the
truth of statements about intention collectively read requires nothing
other than intentions and their subjects.<a href="#fn6"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6" role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
<p>But are there really plural subjects of intention? One possibility is
that there merely seem to be, and are not actually, collective readings
of sentences about intentions like (<a href="#item:twins-intention"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="item:twins-intention">[item:twins-intention]</a>) above.
There are a range of objections along these lines. Most extreme is the
claim that all apparently collective predication is really disguised
distributive predication. A more limited objection is that statements
about actions and intentions merely seem to have collective readings.
<span class="citation" data-cites="ludwig:2016_individual">Ludwig (2016,
chap. 9)</span> offers a detailed discussion along these lines. His
conclusion is carefully nuanced:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>‘we do not need to accept genuine plural [...] agents into our
ontology in order to accept what we say about [...] collective action,
at least insofar as we express this using plural subject terms.’ <span
class="citation" data-cites="ludwig:2016_individual">(Ludwig 2016,
168)</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Ludwig might be right that semantic considerations do not force us to
accept that plural subjects exist. Given his further premise that plural
subjects should be avoided if possible, this would be a compelling
argument against the existence of coherent collective readings. But,
importantly, Ludwig finds nothing forcing us to reject their existence
either. So as long as there is either no general presumption against
plural subjects or else sufficient reason to suppose that they are
necessary, it is not incoherent to imagine statements about intention
have true collective readings. Minimally, collective readings are a
helpful tool for clarifying what the plural subject strategy is.</p>
<p>But is it really coherent to suppose that intentions might have more
than one subject? One might object that to have an intention it is
necessary to have a mind; and that having a mind minimally involves
having a range of mental states, and perhaps even being self-aware. <a
href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> <span class="citation"
data-cites="Schmid:2013_self">Schmid (2013)</span>, who has perhaps the
best-developed version of the plural subject strategy, accepts this
constraint but argues that there are no good grounds for supposing that
it could not be met. Likewise, <span class="citation"
data-cites="helm_plural_2008">Helm (2008)</span> argues that there are
plural subjects with a range of ‘emotions and desires in the right sort
of rational structure’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="helm_plural_2008">(Helm 2008, 29)</span>. Of course this
would mean that plural subjects are unlikely to be involved in
spontaneous interactions between strangers, as when I am struggling to
propel my heavy push chair on to the bus and you helpfully seize the
front and we lift together. Plural subjects on views like Schmid’s or
Helm’s would require vastly more intimate, long-term connections between
individuals.</p>
<p>If we follow Schmid or Helm, it is possible to wonder how there could
be plural subjects. And the sense of mystery one might have about this
could, perhaps, motivate rejecting the entire strategy in favour of
apparently less mysterious alternatives. But this would be an error. Any
of the strategies can be developed in ways that will seem mysterious to
at least some philosophers. But one of my aims is to draw attention to
the existence of straightforward, nonmysterious ways of developing each
strategy.</p>
<p>An alternative, potentially less mysterious plural subject view might
be based on rejecting the claim that having an intention entails having
a range of mental states. This view could be inspired by reflection that
humans are prone to attribute mental states on the slightest of pretexts
to things which, as they know, lack not only minds but even physical
bodies <span class="citation" data-cites="Heider:1944ts">(Heider and
Simmel 1944)</span>.<a href="#fn8" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a> Whether or not things cannot
actually have intentions without having minds, no such constraint
appears to apply to at least one significant strand of everyday
thinking. Perhaps, then, the plural subject strategy is needed for
capturing ways in which some people sometimes think.</p>
<p>We can take this one step further. Here is a way in which you and I
could become the plural subject of an intention. We each somehow become
convinced, however mistakenly, that you and I are the plural subjects of
an intention to cook dinner. This thought might influence our behaviour:
thinking, perhaps mistakenly, that having this intention means we are
subject to various norms, we might aim to act in ways that conform to
them. We are, by our lights, acting as if we had this intention. We
could also be taking for granted that we were plural subjects of a range
of other beliefs, desires and mental states, and perhaps explicitly
attributing some as our activity unfolds. And others, if they became
convinced, perhaps mistakenly, that we had this intention, might also
think and act accordingly. In this way, what began as merely a mistake
became real enough to shape the social world through being adopted as a
normative ideal.<a href="#fn9" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref9"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a></p>
<p>In this section I have introduced the plural subject strategy and
offered a preliminary and superficial case for its theoretical
coherence. Following this strategy can lead to various quite different
theories. On some theories, the existence of plural subjects involves
long-term, intimate connections capable of supporting a shared mental
life. On other possible theories, plural subjects can be temporary
phenomena arising from the specific needs of a moment.</p>
<p>This falls short of showing that the plural subject strategy is
successful. For it to succeed, minimally there must be cases in which
the existence of plural subjects is actually what distinguishes joint
activities from things people do in parallel but merely individually.
(At least that is what one quite prominent approach requires, as we saw
in section <a href="#sec:background" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:background">3</a>.) I have tried to indicate the
difficulties involved in showing that no such cases could exist. But of
course we have not seen positive grounds to suppose that there are now,
or have ever been, any intentions (or other mental states) which do have
plural subjects. Following the approach of section <a
href="#sec:live-it-out" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:live-it-out">2</a>, the possibility that there is a
theoretically coherent plural subject theory which some people could aim
to live out is reason to accept that such a theory could capture an
aspect of shared intention.</p>
<p>For what it is worth, my own sense is that it would be quite hard to
establish, in practice, that a particular situation did involve a plural
subject, and that the difficulty of doing so may have been
underestimated. To illustrate, <span class="citation"
data-cites="Schmid:2008">Schmid (2008)</span> claims that plural agents
feature in common sense thinking. This claim is hard to evaluate because
other philosophers would probably reject it (<span class="citation"
data-cites="ludwig:2016_individual">(Ludwig 2016)</span>, perhaps).
Certainly philosophers seem vulnerable to making wrong assumptions about
common sense thinking in other cases <span class="citation"
data-cites="starmans:2012_folk nagel:2013_authentic starmans:2013_taking">(e.g.
Starmans and Friedman 2012, 2013; Nagel, Mar, and San Juan 2013)</span>.
One as yet unresolved challenge is to develop an operationalisation
which would enable us to distinguish someone thinking and acting in
terms of plural subjects from someone operating with a different
conception of shared intention. Whereas we have multiple methods for
identifying stated preferences (including contingent valuation and
choice modelling), we currently lack any hint about how we might
identify attitudes towards plural subjects. This challenge is made
harder by the need to distinguish plural subjects from aggregate
subjects.</p>
<h1 id="sec:aggregate">The Aggregate Subject Strategy</h1>
<p>An aggregate subject is a subject with proper parts which are
themselves subjects in their own right. If you have intentions and some
proper parts of you also have intentions of their own, then you are an
aggregate subject.</p>
<p>Although our interest is in subjects of intention, and of mental
states generally, a non-mental illustration may be helpful. The
Portuguese man o’war, <em>Physalia physalis</em>, is an animal composed
of polyps which are themselves born as animals in their own right. Why
is the man o’war an aggregate subject rather than a plural subject?
Because it is numerically distinct from the animals which compose it.
These may change over its lifetime. By contrast, in the case of a plural
subject, there is nothing that could continue to exist if one of the
individuals ceases to exist. A plural subject is not a thing at all: it
is just some individuals. An aggregate subject, even one which right now
consists of nothing but some individuals, is nevertheless a thing that
is logically distinct from the individuals which comprise it.</p>
<p>For a non-mental illustration which features both plural and
aggregate subjects, consider:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>The protestors formed a barrier which blocked the
entrance.</p></li>
</ol>
<p>Forming the barrier is something the protestors do collectively. They
(and no other thing) are the plural subject of the forming. But in
talking about the barrier we have introduced an aggregate entity.
Although it is composed of the protestors and nothing else, it is
numerically distinct from them. We know the barrier is distinct from the
protestors because one of the protestors might abandon the barrier and
be replaced by a new protestor.</p>
<p>Not everything true of an aggregate subject is true of a
corresponding plural subject, even when, as in the protestors’ case, the
only parts of the aggregate subject are the plural subject. For example,
the barrier may be capable of surviving an assault which would destroy
the plural subject. And, conversely, it is true that the plural subject
formed the barrier but false that the aggregate subject did so. The
mental case is similar. To be an aggregate subject, a thing must have
its own intentions (or other mental states) which are at least
potentially distinct from those of its parts <span class="citation"
data-cites="bjornsson:2017_corporate">(Björnsson and Hess 2017,
274)</span>.</p>
<p>How could there be aggregate subjects of intention? As List and
Pettit put it:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>‘Let a collection of individuals form and act on a single, robustly
rational body of attitudes [...] and it will be an agent.’</p>
</blockquote>
<p>Individuals sometimes act in this way only because their interests
are so closely aligned, as when a variety of finance professionals all
rush to exploit a tax loophole so that state finances appear ravaged by
a many-handed beast.<a href="#fn10" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a> Alternatively, individuals may
authorise a representative to speak for them as a group. Such cases are
unlikely to be theoretically interesting given our aim of investigating
shared intention more broadly <span class="citation"
data-cites="list_pettit:2011">(List and Pettit 2011, 7ff)</span>.
Instead we should focus on cases where an aggregate agent has what
Sugden calls <em>autonomy</em>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>An aggregate subject has autonomy if there is ‘the possibility that
every member of the group has an individual preference for y over x
(say, each prefers wine bars to pubs) while the group acts on an
objective that ranks x above y.’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="Sugden:2000mw">(Sugden 2000)</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>The challenge, then, is to explain how there can be aggregate
subjects which are autonomous from the subjects which compose them.</p>
<p>One approach to meeting this challenge borrows from decision theory.
It is possible to use decision theory as an ‘elucidation of the notions
of subjective probability [roughly, belief] and subjective desirability
or utility [roughly, desire]’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="Jeffrey:1983oe">(Jeffrey 1983, xi)</span>. Whether or not
there are other ways of elucidating attitudes, decision theory provides
one coherent way of thinking about them. But decision theory is also
agnostic about what subjects are. As long as a thing’s behaviour fits a
certain pattern, one that is specified by axioms linking attitudes to
actions, the thing can coherently be attributed preferences. This is why
decision theory and its derivatives can be applied not only in
describing humans but also bacteria, business organisations and
countries <span class="citation" data-cites="dixit:2014_games">(Dixit,
Skeath, and Reiley 2014, chap. 10)</span>. Being agnostic about what
subjects are makes it a useful tool for constructing a theory of
aggregate agents.</p>
<p>In essence, the construction goes like this.<a href="#fn11"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref11" role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a>
Two or more individuals take themselves, rightly or wrongly, to be
components of an aggregate agent. These individuals each ascribe
preferences, and perhaps other attitudes, to the aggregate agent, and
they all ascribe the same attitudes. They then use these preferences to
rank combinations of individual actions, and each individual selects an
action from a highest-ranking combination. Given the usual axioms about
preferences being transitive and so on <span class="citation"
data-cites="steele:2020_decision">(Steele and Stefánsson 2020)</span>,
and given some background assumptions about the individuals’ knowledge
of their situation, it will be possible to use decision theory to model
the situation as if there were an aggregate agent. And if we follow
Jeffrey in taking decision theory as elucidating preference and other
attitudes, we can infer that there actually is an aggregate agent.
Further, because the preferences and other attitudes ascribed by the
individuals need not be their own, the aggregate agent has autonomy in
the above sense.</p>
<p>How might the aggregate subject strategy provide a notion of shared
intention? And how might it enable us to distinguish joint actions from
things people do in parallel but merely individually (see section <a
href="#sec:background" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:background">3</a>)? One possibility is to stipulate
that the intentions arrived at by individuals through the process of
determining how the aggregate agent will act comprise a shared intention
(<span class="citation" data-cites="Gold:2007zd">(Gold and Sugden
2007)</span>; alternative views are offered by <span class="citation"
data-cites="bardsley:2007_collective">(Bardsley 2007)</span> and <span
class="citation" data-cites="pacherie:2013_lite">(Pacherie
2013)</span>). On this view, one way for an activity to be genuinely
joint is for it to issue from reasoning about the preferences of an
aggregate subject where each reasoner is a part of that aggregate
subject.<a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
<p>None of this shows, of course, that there actually are aggregate
subjects of preference or intention. Even assuming there are, we cannot
yet say whether their existence is actually what distinguishes joint
activities from things people do in parallel but merely individually. My
aim in this section was merely to defend the theoretical possibility of
aggregate subjects.</p>
<h1 id="sec:reductive">The Reductive Strategy</h1>
<p>If you seek to characterise shared intention entirely in terms of
ordinary, individual subjects and their ordinary, individual attitudes
then you are pursuing the reductive strategy.</p>
<p>Contemporary interest in the reductive strategy starts with <span
class="citation" data-cites="sellars:1963_imperatives">Sellars (1963,
203)</span>’s observation that statements to the effect that we intend
that we cook dinner are ‘clearly not the logical sum of’ statements
about each of us individually intending that we cook dinner (<span
class="citation" data-cites="tuomela_we-intentions_1988">(Tuomela and
Miller 1988)</span>). Apparently, then, our having a shared intention
that we cook dinner together cannot consist simply in our each intending
this. A natural question is whether there is any combination of
ordinary, individual intentions, knowledge states or other mental
attitudes our having which could be necessary or sufficient for us to
have a shared intention that we cook dinner.</p>
<p>The most extensively developed and widely discussed attempt to
provide sufficient conditions for shared intention is <span
class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2014_book">Bratman (2014)</span>’s.
The full account is complex but the core idea, put roughly, is this. For
us to have a shared intention that we cook dinner, it suffices that we
each intend that we cook dinner, that we intend to do so by way and
because of these intentions, and that this is all common knowledge among
us.</p>
<p>Proponents of the reductive strategy have succeeded in providing sets
of necessary or sufficient conditions which have intuitive pull for some
and against which none of the published counterexamples have been widely
accepted as successful. This is remarkable given that the model for
Bratman and several others is Grice’s analysis of meaning <span
class="citation" data-cites="Bratman:1992mi">(Bratman 1992, footnote 13
to p. 334)</span>, which met a different fate. A ‘flood’ of
counterexamples to Grice’s analysis led to extensive revisions, to which
further counterexamples were developed <span class="citation"
data-cites="searle:2007_grice">(Searle 2007, 11)</span>. Confidence in
the project’s eventual success was shaken when, in a dramatic change of
direction, Schiffer, who was formerly a leading proponent of the Gricean
analysis, argued that the whole project was based on a mistake. <a
href="#fn13" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a> While Grice’s analysis has
continued to inspire various projects (<span class="citation"
data-cites="moore:2016_gricean">(Moore 2017)</span>, for example), we
are no closer to a successful reductive analysis. By contrast, generally
accepted counterexamples to reductive sets of necessary or sufficient
conditions for shared intention appear to be rare.</p>
<p>A diversity of views about the features of shared intentions can be
found in the reductive strategy. The various conditions proposed imply
conflicting views about whether having a shared intention invariably
involves dispositions to help (for: <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014, 56–57)</span>; against:
<span class="citation" data-cites="Bratman:1992mi">(Bratman
1992)</span>, <span class="citation"
data-cites="ludwig_collective_2007">(Ludwig 2007)</span>), common
knowledge (for: <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1993je">(Bratman 1993)</span>; against: <span
class="citation" data-cites="blomberg:2015_common">(Blomberg
2016)</span>), and corresponding individual intentions on each subject’s
part (for: <span class="citation" data-cites="Bratman:1992mi">(Bratman
1992)</span>; against: <span class="citation"
data-cites="sellars:1963_imperatives">(Sellars 1963)</span>). There are
also further issues on which theorists could disagree, including on
whether shared intention invariably involves contralateral commitment
(for: <span class="citation" data-cites="gilbert:2009shared">(Gilbert
2009)</span>; against: <span class="citation"
data-cites="Roth:2004ki">(Roth 2004, 361)</span>), cooperation <span
class="citation"
data-cites="salomone-sehr:2022_cooperation">(Salomone-Sehr 2022)</span>
or nonobservational knowledge <span class="citation"
data-cites="roessler:2020_plural">(Roessler 2024)</span>.</p>
<p>This gives rise to a challenge to the reductive strategy. For the
diversity makes it unclear when proponents of the reductive strategy can
coherently be interpreted as offering competing attempts to characterise
a single thing and when as offering compatible attempts to characterise
different things.<a href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a></p>
<p>The reductive strategy allows us to construct many theories, each
internally theoretically coherent but inconsistent with other reductive
theories that share an explanandum. For any combination of views about
the features of shared intention, it would be possible to construct a
coherent reductive theory. If we simplify and regard the six features
mentioned above as binary, this yields 64 reductive theories. The
scarcity of counterexamples cuts two ways.</p>
<h1 id="the-limits-of-a-metatheoretical-principle">The Limits of a
Metatheoretical Principle</h1>
<p>We have seen that the three strategies each yield theoretically
coherent positions, and, further, that at least one of these strategies
alone yields many theoretically coherent positions. Can we decide
between the positions by invoking metatheoretical principles? This idea
has been carefully developed by Bratman:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>‘If we can get a plausible model of modest sociality without
appealing to a fundamental discontinuity in the step from individual
planning agency to such sociality, then there is a presumption against
an appeal to such a discontinuity in our theorising.’ <span
class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014,
36)</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>If true, this principle provides a good reason to prefer the
reductive strategy over theories like that of <span class="citation"
data-cites="Searle:1990em">Searle (1990)</span> and perhaps also that of
<span class="citation" data-cites="gilbert:2014_book">Gilbert
(2013)</span>.<a href="#fn15" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a> This is because each of those
theorists postulates a fundamental discontinuity. In Searle’s case, this
is a novel kind of attitude, the ‘we-intention’, which differs from
ordinary intention along the same dimension as desire differs from
intention.<a href="#fn16" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref16"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a> For her part, Gilbert postulates a
novel kind of commitment and associated nonmoral norms. The novel kinds
of intention and commitment are fundamental discontinuities.</p>
<p>Although Bratman’s metatheoretical principle rules against some
theories, it does not exclude many of those derived from the reductive
strategy. Nor does it exclude the plural and aggregate subject
strategies outright. After all, the whole point of plural subjects is
that they are nothing but some subjects <span class="citation"
data-cites="boolos:1984_value">(Boolos 1984)</span>. And the bare idea
of an aggregate subject is no more a fundamental discontinuity than is a
barrier composed of protestors. Further, as we have seen (in sections <a
href="#sec:plural" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:plural">4</a> and <a href="#sec:aggregate"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:aggregate">5</a>), both
plural subject and the aggregate subject strategies can be implemented
without appealing to fundamental discontinuities.</p>
<p>Apparently, then, Bratman’s metatheoretical principle is limited.
There are theories from each of the three strategies—plural, aggregate
and reductive—between which it fails to discriminate.</p>
<p>This is why I have presented the strategies in an unusual order. The
usual way is to start with the reductive strategy and then possibly to
justify adopting one of the others by some failure of that strategy
(see, for example, <span class="citation"
data-cites="helm_plural_2008">(Helm 2008)</span> ). In my view that is a
mistake. There is no consensus on attempts to demonstrate failure of the
reductive strategy generally. Quite the opposite: after three decades
there is not yet even a successful published counterexample to the most
widely discussed reductive theory (<span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1992mi">(Bratman 1992)</span>; <span
class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2022_planning">(Bratman
2022b)</span>). But, equally, the mere absence of successful objections
to a theory is not enough to establish its truth. The plural and
aggregate subject strategies are significant not because the reductive
strategy can be shown to fail but because they also yield theoretically
coherent, as yet unfalsified theories.</p>
<p>These are deep waters. Some researchers hold that plural subjects
should be avoided if possible, even narrowly logical ones (see <span
class="citation" data-cites="ludwig:2016_individual">(Ludwig
2016)</span> cited in section <a href="#sec:plural"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:plural">4</a>). Some even
suggest that ‘all plural locutions should be paraphrased away’. <a
href="#fn17" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref17"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a> Were this true, the plural subject
strategy might be ruled out for reasons not specifically psychological.
As this illustrates, the considerations offered here fall far short of
demonstrating that it would be impossible to find general principles
which do discriminate among the three strategies for shared
intention.</p>
<p>But there is also a positive argument for my thesis that all three
strategies are needed.</p>
<h1 id="sec:multiple-strategies">Do We Need Multiple Strategies for
Shared Intention?</h1>
<p>It is possible for people to intentionally live out one or another
theory of shared intention: to think and act as if that theory were true
of them. This indicates that no one theory alone could be sufficient to
fully characterise shared intention. Or so I will argue in this
section.</p>
<p>For each of the three strategies, there are recipes you and I could
explicitly aim to follow. To illustrate, suppose the time for us to face
the growing pile of dirty dishes in our kitchen has finally come. Having
both been inspired by <span class="citation"
data-cites="Schmid:2008">Schmid (2008)</span>, we might regard ourselves
as the plural subject of an intention to wash the dishes and act
accordingly (see section <a href="#sec:plural" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:plural">4</a>). Or perhaps what comes to mind is
instead an idea about ascribing preferences to an aggregate subject and
doing our parts to fulfill them (see section <a href="#sec:aggregate"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:aggregate">5</a>). Or
maybe we have both just been reading <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">Bratman (2014)</span> and are impressed
that we could benefit by forming and making explicit the intentions he
identifies, thereby meeting his sufficient conditions for shared
intention (see section <a href="#sec:reductive"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:reductive">6</a>). This
being new to us, we even decide to write everything down so that we can
track the attitudes and actions. Things go well and we continue to use
the recipe for shared intention in our future activities. Over time our
use of the chosen recipe becomes so familiar that we hardly need to
think about it at all.</p>
<p>The possibility of our aiming to follow a recipe associated with any
one of the three strategies for shared intention, first explicitly and
then with greater skill, suggests that no one strategy can claim to be
uniquely correct. Instead, capturing the full range of phenomena
involving shared intention will require theories associated with several
different strategies.</p>
<p>The extent to which we actually succeed in following a recipe may be
quite limited, much as our stated preferences alone may explain only a
small part of our behaviour (see section <a href="#sec:live-it-out"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:live-it-out">2</a>). What
matters for our purposes, however, is just that the aim of living out
the theory is not entirely inert. It should influence some of our
thoughts and actions. This is what makes it reasonable to accept, in the
absence of overriding reasons, that the theory could be true of us.</p>
<p>It may be helpful to consider possible responses to this position.
One response starts with the observation that following a recipe
together may involve us having a shared intention to do so. Probably,
then, not all shared intention is a consequence of our intentionally
living out a theory of shared intention. We might therefore be motivated
to search for phylogenically or ontogenically foundational forms of
shared intention (see, for example, <span class="citation"
data-cites="Tollefsen:2005vh Rakoczy:2007ou pacherie:2013_lite">(Tollefsen
2005; Rakoczy and Tomasello 2007; Pacherie 2013)</span>). Perhaps it
would even be possible, eventually, to relate strategies and theories to
different stages and needs. This is a radical response which breaks from
the most extensively developed, best defended theories currently
available, which give no such importance to evolutionary or
developmental considerations.</p>
<p>An alternative response would aim to distinguish recipes that humans
actually follow, noting that these may be fewer than those which could
in principle be used.<a href="#fn18" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref18"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>18</sup></a> There are at least two potential
sources of inspiration for this response. One is narrowly philosophical
attempts to establish that aggregate or plural subjects of shared
intention are either practically indispensable or required for certain
explanatory purposes. (<span class="citation"
data-cites="roth:2014_indispensability">(Roth 2014)</span> presents both
kinds of argument, for example.) The other source of inspiration for
this response could be taken from <span class="citation"
data-cites="gomez-lavin:2019_normativity">Gomez-Lavin and Rachar
(2019)</span>, who offer findings which they interpret as showing that
everyday thinking involves distinctive features of <span
class="citation" data-cites="gilbert:2014_book">Gilbert (2013)</span>’s
account of shared intention. Just here we encounter a dilemma. Narrowly
philosophical arguments may establish that humans do follow one recipe
but appear unlikely to show that they do not also follow other recipes.
On the other hand, taking inspiration from experimental research
involves a radical departure from the kinds of consideration usually
taken to motivate a theory of shared intention. This is clear from
responses to <span class="citation"
data-cites="gomez-lavin:2019_normativity">Gomez-Lavin and Rachar
(2019)</span>’s work, which include <span class="citation"
data-cites="lohr:2022_recent">Löhr (2022)</span> who challenges their
interpretation on methodological grounds and <span class="citation"
data-cites="michael:2022_intuitions">Michael and Butterfill
(2022)</span> who offer apparently contrasting findings. Those authors’
interest in discovering how people actually think about joint activities
has no counterpart in the work of the leading philosophers.</p>
<p>A bolder and more orthodox response might be to allow that we could
coherently follow any of the recipes but deny that all of them yield
shared intention (or, more ambitiously, even that any do). The challenge
for proponents of this response is to identify grounds for rejecting the
view that following the recipes yields genuine shared intention. They
would need to enable all of us, as researchers, to know which things a
theory of shared intention should explain independently of our knowing
which theory is true. As things stand now, philosophers typically use
particular examples of joint activities to introduce the topic (see
section <a href="#sec:introduction" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:introduction">1</a>, and <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014, 5–6)</span>, for example).
The usual assumption is that the examples are sufficient to identify
‘shared activity of the sort we are trying to understand’ <span
class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014,
6)</span>. But intentionally following one of the recipes is, of course,
one way of walking together, playing a piano duet, or painting a house
together. So if examples of joint activities provide us as researchers
with a common understanding of the things to be explained, that common
understanding supports the view that more than one strategy’s recipes
are needed to capture them. Opponents of this view need further
theory-independent ways of identifying what is to be explained.</p>
<p>Overall, it seems plausible that at least three different strategies
for shared intention are needed. This is because each of the plural,
aggregate and reductive strategies is associated with a recipe people
could intentionally follow and thereby manifest phenomena for
characterising which the corresponding strategy is needed.</p>
<h1 id="conclusion">Conclusion</h1>
<p>I have explored three strategies for elucidating ideas about shared
intention. The plural, aggregate and reductive strategies are often
regarded as competing attempts to characterise a single target.
Proponents of the plural and aggregate subject strategies typically
object that the reductive strategies fail, while proponents of reductive
strategies aim to show that the other strategies are not needed (or, if
they are needed, that they can be tacked on to a reductive strategy; see
<a href="#sec:introduction" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:introduction">1</a>). Despite much effort, no such
arguments currently enable us to determine which strategy is correct. In
contrast, I have appealed to the possibility of intentionally living out
different theories to argue that for each strategy there are phenomena
which can be correctly characterised only by following that strategy
(section <a href="#sec:multiple-strategies" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:multiple-strategies">8</a>). There may also be many
theories derived from the reductive strategy for which the same is true
(section <a href="#sec:reductive" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:reductive">6</a>).</p>
<p>If correct, this conclusion marks a collective success. Whereas it
was initially assumed that at most one strategy would work, the careful
development of multiple theories by their various proponents suggests
there are multiple theoretically coherent possibilities, each having
intuitive appeal to some.</p>
<p>Despite the success, this conclusion is not a tenable stopping point.
Whereas progress surely requires that we can discover grounds to reject
some theories, the conclusion that we need multiple strategies seems to
imply that anything goes in constructing theories of shared
intention.</p>
<p>What to do? The conclusion that we need multiple strategies rests on
the premise that we need at least one theory of shared intention. One
way to avoid it might be to reject this premise (see footnote <a
href="#fn:no-shared-intention" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="fn:no-shared-intention">2</a> on page for discussions
which may motivate considering this option). But while questioning the
premise may lead to fresh insights, the idea that we might completely do
away with theories of shared intention seems unpromising insofar as some
existing theories have been fruitfully applied beyond philosophy. <a
href="#fn19" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref19"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>19</sup></a></p>
<p>A more hopeful response to the untenable conclusion would be to take
inspiration from other domains where multiple apparently incompatible
approaches have been discovered. We might draw a very inexact parallel
with the twin possibilities of using sets to replace plural
quantification and of using plural quantification to construct sets
<span class="citation" data-cites="linnebo:2022_plural">(Linnebo 2022,
sec. 4.3)</span>. Perhaps—so the hopeful response—we can show that the
strategies for shared intention yield theories which are in some sense
equivalent ways of elucidating a single set of ideas about shared
intention.<a href="#fn20" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref20"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>20</sup></a> Or perhaps the informal nature of
the theories and their diversity means that this response is just too
hopeful.</p>
<p>A simpler response is also available. Several researchers have
pointed to things which stand in need of explanation and which, they
suggest, might be explained using a theory of shared intention. These
include behavioural and neuroscientific findings <span class="citation"
data-cites="gallotti:2013_social">(Gallotti and Frith 2013)</span>,
patterns in cognitive development <span class="citation"
data-cites="Tomasello:2007gl">(Tomasello and Carpenter 2007)</span>, and
decision making <span class="citation"
data-cites="Sugden:2000mw">(Sugden 2000)</span>. In some cases this has
led to debate on which things theories of shared intention are supposed
to explain (see, for example, <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014)</span> on <span
class="citation" data-cites="Gold:2007zd">(Gold and Sugden
2007)</span>). One way to make further progress would be, in offering a
theory about shared intention, to specify things which stand in need of
explanation in a way that can be understood independently of the
theory’s truth or falsity; and to formulate the theory in such a way
that makes it possible to determine, eventually, whether it does
actually explain those things.</p>
<p>To illustrate how this might go, consider a relatively easy family of
questions. How do various groups of individuals represent the activities
of some agents acting together in particular situations? Instead of
interpreting existing theories as claims about how shared intention is,
we can also interpret (or usefully misinterpret) them as theories about
how people represent situations involving shared intention. Generating
predictions from existing theories is difficult but there are signs that
this might be possible.<a href="#fn21" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref21" role="doc-noteref"><sup>21</sup></a> Relative to this
project—that of discovering how individuals represent joint
activities—the existence of many theories is not a bad thing. After all,
there may well be differences between species, between infants, children
and adults, and between cultures. Further, a single individual may adopt
different models in different situations. Diversity in the theories of
shared intention may enable us to discover genuine diversity in the
things to be explained.</p>
<p>In conclusion, we researchers need, but lack, a common understanding
of what theories of shared intention are theories of. It has been
fruitful to construct different models of how aspects of shared
intention might be. The next step is to find out which models explain
which things.</p>
<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
role="doc-bibliography">
<div id="ref-alberini:2019_revealed" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Alberini, Anna. 2019. <span>“Revealed Versus <span>Stated</span>
<span>Preferences</span>: What <span>Have</span> <span>We</span>
<span>Learned</span> <span>About</span> <span>Valuation</span> and
<span>Behavior</span>?”</span> <em>Review of Environmental Economics and
Policy</em> 13 (2). <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rez010">https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rez010</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bacharach:2006fk" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Bacharach, Michael. 2006. <em>Beyond Individual Choice</em>. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. <a
href="http://webcat.warwick.ac.uk/record=b3272720~S1">http://webcat.warwick.ac.uk/record=b3272720~S1</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-baier:1997_joint" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Baier, Annette C. 1997. <span>“Doing <span>Things With Others</span>:
<span>The Mental Commons</span>.”</span> In <em>Commonality and
Particularity in Ethics</em>, edited by Lilli Alanen, Sarah Heinamaa,
and Thomas Wallgren, 15–44. Palgrave Macmillan. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-25602-0_2">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-25602-0_2</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-bardsley:2007_collective" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Bardsley, Nicholas. 2007. <span>“On Collective Intentions: Collective
Action in Economics and Philosophy.”</span> <em>Synthese</em> 157 (2):
141–59. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-006-9034-z">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-006-9034-z</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-beshears:2008_how" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian.
2008. <span>“How Are Preferences Revealed?”</span> <em>Journal of Public
Economics</em> 92 (8): 1787–94. https://doi.org/<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.04.010">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.04.010</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-bjornsson:2017_corporate" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Björnsson, Gunnar, and Kendy Hess. 2017. <span>“Corporate
<span>Crocodile</span> <span>Tears</span>?: On the <span>Reactive</span>
<span>Attitudes</span> of <span>Corporate</span>
<span>Agents</span>.”</span> <em>Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research</em> 94 (2): 273–98. <a
href="https://www.jstor.org/stable/48578761">https://www.jstor.org/stable/48578761</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-blomberg:2015_common" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Blomberg, Olle. 2016. <span>“Common <span>Knowledge</span> and
<span>Reductionism</span> about <span>Shared Agency</span>.”</span>
<em>Australasian Journal of Philosophy</em> 94 (2): 315–26. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2015.1055581">https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2015.1055581</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-boolos:1984_value" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Boolos, George. 1984. <span>“To Be Is to Be a Value of a Variable (or to
Be Some Values of Some Variables).”</span> <em>The Journal of
Philosophy</em> 81 (8): 430–49.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1987xw" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Bratman, Michael E. 1987. <em>Intentions, Plans, and Practical
Reasoning</em>. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1992mi" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 1992. <span>“Shared Cooperative Activity.”</span> <em>The
Philosophical Review</em> 101 (2): 327–41.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1993je" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 1993. <span>“Shared Intention.”</span> <em>Ethics</em> 104: 97–113.
</div>
<div id="ref-bratman:2014_book" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2014. <em>Shared Agency: A Planning Theory of Acting Together</em>.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. <a
href="http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199897933.001.0001">http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199897933.001.0001</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-bratman:2015_shareda" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2015. <span>“Shared <span>Agency</span>: <span>Replies</span> to
<span>Ludwig</span>, <span>Pacherie</span>, <span>Petersson</span>,
<span>Roth</span>, and <span>Smith</span>.”</span> <em>Journal of Social
Ontology</em> 1 (1): 59–76.
</div>
<div id="ref-bratman:2022_shared" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2022a. <em>Shared and <span>Institutional</span>
<span>Agency</span>: Toward a <span>Planning</span> <span>Theory</span>
of <span>Human</span> <span>Practical</span>
<span>Organization</span></em>. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-bratman:2022_planning" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2022b. <span>“A <span>Planning Theory</span> of <span>Acting
Together</span>.”</span> <em>Journal of the American Philosophical
Association</em> 8 (3): 1–8. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1017/apa.2021.17">https://doi.org/10.1017/apa.2021.17</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-carson:1996_contingent" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Carson, Richard T., Nicholas E. Flores, Kerry M. Martin, and Jennifer L.
Wright. 1996. <span>“Contingent Valuation and Revealed Preference
Methodologies: Comparing the Estimates for Quasi-Public Goods.”</span>
<em>Land Economics</em> 72 (1): 80–99. <a
href="http://0-www-jstor-org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/stable/3147159">http://0-www-jstor-org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/stable/3147159</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-chant_unintentional_2007" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Chant, Sara Rachel. 2007. <span>“Unintentional Collective
Action.”</span> <em>Philosophical Explorations: An International Journal
for the Philosophy of Mind and Action</em> 10 (3): 245. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/13869790701535246">https://doi.org/10.1080/13869790701535246</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-dixit:2014_games" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Dixit, Avinash, Susan Skeath, and David Reiley. 2014. <em>Games of
Strategy</em>. New York: W. W. Norton; Company.
</div>
<div id="ref-frankfurt1978problem" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Frankfurt, H. G. 1978. <span>“<span class="nocase">The problem of
action</span>.”</span> <em>American Philosophical Quarterly</em> 15 (2):
157–62.
</div>
<div id="ref-gallotti:2013_social" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Gallotti, Mattia, and Chris D. Frith. 2013. <span>“Social Cognition in
the We-Mode.”</span> <em>Trends in Cognitive Sciences</em> 17 (4):
160–65. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.002">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.002</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert_walking_1990" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Gilbert, Margaret P. 1990. <span>“Walking Together: A Paradigmatic
Social Phenomenon.”</span> <em>Midwest Studies in Philosophy</em> 15:
1–14.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert:2007_searle" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2007. <span>“Searle and <span>Collective Intentions</span>.”</span>
In <em>Intentional Acts and Institutional Facts</em>, edited by Savas L.
Tsohatzidis, 31–48. Springer. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-6104-2_1">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-6104-2_1</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert:2009shared" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2009. <span>“Shared Intention and Personal Intentions.”</span>
<em>Philosophical Studies</em> 144 (1): 167–87. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-009-9372-z">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-009-9372-z</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert:2014_book" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2013. <em>Joint Commitment: How We Make the Social World</em>.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. <a
href="http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199970148.001.0001">http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199970148.001.0001</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert:2022_simple" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2022. <span>“A <span>Simple Theory</span> of <span>Acting
Together</span>.”</span> <em>Journal of the American Philosophical
Association</em> X (X): 1–10.
</div>
<div id="ref-Gold:2007zd" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Gold, Natalie, and Robert Sugden. 2007. <span>“Collective Intentions and
Team Agency.”</span> <em>Journal of Philosophy</em> 104 (3): 109–37.
</div>
<div id="ref-gomez-lavin:2019_normativity" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Gomez-Lavin, Javier, and Matthew Rachar. 2019. <span>“Normativity in
Joint Action.”</span> <em>Mind and Language</em> 34 (1): 97–120. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/mila.12195">https://doi.org/10.1111/mila.12195</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Grafenhain:2010zl" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Gräfenhain, Maria, Tanya Behne, Malinda Carpenter, and Michael
Tomasello. 2009. <span>“Young Children’s Understanding of Joint
Commitments.”</span> <em>Developmental Psychology</em> 45 (5): 1430–43.
</div>
<div id="ref-Heider:1944ts" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Heider, Fritz, and Marianne Simmel. 1944. <span>“An Experimental Study
of Apparent Behaviour.”</span> <em>American Journal of Psychology</em>
57 (2): 243–59.
</div>
<div id="ref-helm_plural_2008" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Helm, Bennett W. 2008. <span>“Plural Agents.”</span> <em>Nous</em> 42
(1): 17–49. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00672.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00672.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Jeffrey:1983oe" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Jeffrey, Richard C. 1983. <em>The Logic of Decision, Second
Edition</em>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-linnebo:2022_plural" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Linnebo, Øystein. 2022. <span>“Plural
<span>Quantification</span>.”</span> In <em>The <span>Stanford
Encyclopedia</span> of <span>Philosophy</span></em>, edited by Edward N.
Zalta, Spring 2022. <span>Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-list_pettit:2011" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
List, Christian, and Philip Pettit. 2011. <em>Group Agency: The
Possibility, Design, and Status of Corporate Agents</em>. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-lohr:2022_recent" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Löhr, Guido. 2022. <span>“Recent <span>Experimental</span>
<span>Philosophy</span> on <span>Joint</span> <span>Action</span>: Do
<span>We</span> <span>Need</span> a <span>New</span>
<span>Normativism</span> <span>About</span> <span>Collective</span>
<span>Action</span>?”</span> <em>The Philosophical Quarterly</em> 72
(3): 754–62. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/pqab070">https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/pqab070</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-longworth:2019_sharing" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Longworth, Guy. 2019. <span>“Sharing Non-Observational
Knowledge.”</span> <em>Inquiry</em> 0 (0): 1–21. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2019.1680430">https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2019.1680430</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ludwig_collective_2007" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Ludwig, Kirk. 2007. <span>“Collective Intentional Behavior from the
Standpoint of Semantics.”</span> <em>Nous</em> 41 (3): 355–93. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00652.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00652.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ludwig:2016_individual" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2016. <em>From <span>Individual</span> to <span>Plural
Agency</span>: <span>Collective Action</span></em>. <span>Oxford
University Press</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-mcgeer:2007_regulative" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
McGeer, Victoria. 2007. <span>“The <span>Regulative Dimension</span> of
<span>Folk Psychology</span>.”</span> In <em>Folk Psychology
Re-Assessed</em>, edited by Daniel D. Hutto and Matthew Ratcliffe,
137–56. Dordrecht: Springer. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-5558-4_8">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-5558-4_8</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-michael:2022_intuitions" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Michael, John, and Stephen Butterfill. 2022. <span>“Intuitions about
Joint Commitment.”</span> <em>Philosophical Psychology</em> 0 (0): 1–16.
<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2022.2153659">https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2022.2153659</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Moll:2007gu" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Moll, Henrike, and Michael Tomasello. 2007. <span>“Cooperation and Human
Cognition: The Vygotskian Intelligence Hypothesis.”</span>
<em>Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B</em> 362 (1480):
639–48.
</div>
<div id="ref-moore:2016_gricean" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Moore, Richard. 2017. <span>“Gricean <span>Communication</span> and
<span>Cognitive Development</span>.”</span> <em>The Philosophical
Quarterly</em> forthcoming. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/pqw049">https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/pqw049</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-nagel:2013_authentic" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Nagel, Jennifer, Raymond Mar, and Valerie San Juan. 2013.
<span>“Authentic Gettier Cases: A Reply to Starmans and
Friedman.”</span> <em>Cognition</em> 129 (3): 666–69. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.08.016">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.08.016</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-pacherie:2013_lite" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Pacherie, Elisabeth. 2013. <span>“Intentional Joint Agency: Shared
Intention Lite.”</span> <em>Synthese</em> 190 (10): 1817–39. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-013-0263-7">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-013-0263-7</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-petersson_collectivity_2007" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Petersson, Björn. 2007. <span>“Collectivity and Circularity.”</span>
<em>Journal of Philosophy</em> 104 (3): 138–56.
</div>
<div id="ref-Rakoczy:2007ou" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Rakoczy, Hannes, and Michael Tomasello. 2007. <span>“The Ontogeny of
Social Ontology: Steps to Shared Intentionality and Status
Functions.”</span> In <em>Intentional Acts and Intentional Facts</em>,
edited by S. L. Tsohatzidis, 113–37. Springer.
</div>
<div id="ref-roessler:2020_plural" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Roessler, Johannes. 2024. <span>“Plural Practical Knowledge.”</span>
<em>Inquiry</em> 67 (4): 1–20. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2020.1787221">https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2020.1787221</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Roth:2004ki" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Roth, Abraham Sesshu. 2004. <span>“Shared Agency and Contralateral
Commitments.”</span> <em>The Philosophical Review</em> 113 (3): 359–410.
</div>
<div id="ref-roth:2014_indispensability" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2014. <span>“Indispensability, the <span>Discursive</span>
<span>Dilemma</span>, and <span>Groups</span> with <span>Minds</span> of
<span>Their</span> <span>Own</span>.”</span> In <em>From
<span>Individual</span> to <span>Collective</span>
<span>Intentionality</span>: New <span>Essays</span></em>, edited by
Gerhard Preyer, Frank Hindriks, and Sara Rachel Chant, 137–62. Oxford
University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-rovane:1998_bounds" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Rovane, Carol A. 1998. <em>The Bounds of Agency: An Essay Inrevisionary
Metaphysics</em>. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press. <a
href="http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/warw/detail.action?docID=668953">http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/warw/detail.action?docID=668953</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-russell:2018_intention" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Russell, Devlin. 2018. <span>“Intention as Action Under Development: Why
Intention Is Not a Mental State.”</span> <em>Canadian Journal of
Philosophy</em> 48 (5): 742–61. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/00455091.2017.1414524">https://doi.org/10.1080/00455091.2017.1414524</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-salomone-sehr:2022_cooperation" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Salomone-Sehr, Jules. 2022. <span>“Cooperation: With or Without
<span>Shared</span> <span>Intentions</span>.”</span> <em>Ethics</em> 132
(2): 414–44. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1086/716877">https://doi.org/10.1086/716877</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Schiffer:1987zb" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Schiffer, Stephen R. 1987. <em>Remnants of Meaning</em>. Bradford Book.
Cambridge, Mass ; London: MIT Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-Schmid:2008" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Schmid, Hans Bernhard. 2008. <span>“Plural Action.”</span>
<em><span>Philosophy of the Social Sciences</span></em> 38 (1): 25–54.
<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0048393107310877">https://doi.org/10.1177/0048393107310877</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Schmid:2013_self" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2013. <span>“Plural Self-Awareness.”</span> <em><span>Phenomenology
and the Cognitive Sciences</span></em> 13 (1): 1–18. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-013-9317-z">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-013-9317-z</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-schweikard:2021_collective" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Schweikard, David P., and Hans Bernhard Schmid. 2021. <span>“Collective
<span>Intentionality</span>.”</span> In <em>The <span>Stanford
Encyclopedia</span> of <span>Philosophy</span></em>, edited by Edward N.
Zalta, Fall 2021. <span>Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Searle:1990em" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Searle, John R. 1990. <span>“Collective Intentions and Actions.”</span>
In <em>Intentions in Communication</em>, edited by P. Cohen, J. Morgan,
and M. E. Pollack, 90–105. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-searle:2007_grice" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2007. <span>“Grice on <span>Meaning</span>: 50 <span>Years</span>
<span>Later</span>.”</span> <em>Teorema: Revista Internacional de
Filosof<span>í</span>a</em> 26 (2): 9–18. <a
href="https://www.jstor.org/stable/43046682">https://www.jstor.org/stable/43046682</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-sellars:1963_imperatives" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Sellars, Wilfred. 1963. <span>“Imperatives, Intentions, and the Logic of
’Ought".”</span> In <em>Morality and the Language of Conduct</em>,
edited by Héctor-Neri Castaneda and George Nakhnikian, 159–218. Detroit:
Wayne State University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-setiya:2022_intention" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Setiya, Kieran. 2022. <span>“Intention.”</span> In <em>The
<span>Stanford Encyclopedia</span> of <span>Philosophy</span></em>,
edited by Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman, Winter 2022.
<span>Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-smith:2015_shared" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Smith, Thomas H. 2015. <span>“Shared <span>Agency</span> on
<span>Gilbert</span> and Deep Continuity.”</span> <em>Journal of Social
Ontology</em> 1 (1): 49–57. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1515/jso-2014-0045">https://doi.org/10.1515/jso-2014-0045</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-starmans:2012_folk" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Starmans, Christina, and Ori Friedman. 2012. <span>“The Folk Conception
of Knowledge.”</span> <em>Cognition</em> 124 (3): 272–83. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2012.05.017">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2012.05.017</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-starmans:2013_taking" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2013. <span>“Taking <span>‘Know’</span> for an Answer: A Reply to
Nagel, San Juan, and Mar.”</span> <em>Cognition</em> 129 (3): 662–65. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.05.009">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.05.009</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-steele:2020_decision" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Steele, Katie, and H. Orri Stefánsson. 2020. <span>“Decision
<span>Theory</span>.”</span> In <em>The <span>Stanford
Encyclopedia</span> of <span>Philosophy</span></em>, edited by Edward N.
Zalta, Winter 2020. <span>Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Sugden:2000mw" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Sugden, Robert. 2000. <span>“Team Preferences.”</span> <em>Economics and
Philosophy</em> 16: 175–204.
</div>
<div id="ref-thompson:2008_life" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Thompson, Michael. 2008. <em>Life and Action: Elementary Structures of
Practice and Practical Thought</em>. <span>Cambridge,
Massachusetts</span>: <span>Harvard University Press</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Tollefsen:2005vh" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Tollefsen, Deborah. 2005. <span>“Let’s Pretend: Children and Joint
Action.”</span> <em>Philosophy of the Social Sciences</em> 35 (75):
74–97.
</div>
<div id="ref-Tomasello:2007gl" class="csl-entry" role="doc-biblioentry">
Tomasello, Michael, and Malinda Carpenter. 2007. <span>“Shared
Intentionality.”</span> <em>Developmental Science</em> 10 (1): 121–25.
</div>
<div id="ref-tuomela_we-intentions_1988" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Tuomela, Raimo, and Kaarlo Miller. 1988. <span>“We-Intentions.”</span>
<em>Philosophical Studies</em> 53 (3): 367–89. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00353512">https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00353512</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-zawidzki:2013_mindshaping" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Zawidzki, Tadeusz Wieslaw. 2013. <em>Mindshaping</em>. Cambridge, MA.:
<span>MIT Press</span>.
</div>
</div>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1"><p>Where I use ‘aggregate’, others have used ‘collective’
<span class="citation" data-cites="bjornsson:2017_corporate">(Björnsson
and Hess 2017, 274)</span> and ‘group’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="list_pettit:2011">List and Pettit (2011, 74)</span>.
Although more familiar, I have avoided these terms because they seem to
me to risk inviting confusing aggregate subjects and plural subjects.<a
href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn2"><p><span id="fn:no-shared-intention"
label="fn:no-shared-intention"></span> This is not an exhaustive
division of strategies. It would also be possible to reject the idea
that we need a notion of shared intention at all. Although beyond the
scope of this essay, there are interesting discussions which may
motivate considering this view in <span class="citation"
data-cites="baier:1997_joint">Baier (1997)</span>, <span
class="citation" data-cites="chant_unintentional_2007">Chant
(2007)</span>, <span class="citation"
data-cites="petersson_collectivity_2007">Petersson (2007)</span>, and
<span class="citation" data-cites="longworth:2019_sharing">Longworth
(2019, 13ff)</span>.</p>
<p>It is also not the only way of dividing strategies. <span
class="citation" data-cites="schweikard:2021_collective">Schweikard and
Schmid (2021, sec. 3)</span> offer a division into ‘content-, mode-, and
subject-accounts of collective intentionality.’ These cut across the
division into plural, aggregate and reductive. Both the plural subject
and the aggregate subject strategies yield ‘subject-accounts’ while the
reductive strategy would yield content-accounts.<a href="#fnref2"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn3"><p>See <span class="citation"
data-cites="list_pettit:2011">List and Pettit (2011, 33)</span> on
‘joint intentions’ and <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2022_shared">Bratman (2022a, 135ff)</span> on
‘institutional intentions’.<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn4"><p><span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert:2009shared">Gilbert (2009, 175)</span> does offer a
theory which appears to involve stipulations about ordinary agents’
views. But this is not supported by investigation, nor is there any
explicit suggestion that an investigation would support the theory.
Others have attempted to investigate aspects of how well Gilbert’s
theory captures ordinary agents’ views <span class="citation"
data-cites="gomez-lavin:2019_normativity michael:2022_intuitions">(Gomez-Lavin
and Rachar 2019; Michael and Butterfill 2022)</span>. But those
researchers are careful to distinguish the aims of their investigations
from supporting, or refuting, Gilbert’s philosophical position. The
leading philosophical theories of attitudes and norms are about ways
people might reasonably be. It is all entirely hypothetical.<a
href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn5"><p>See <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">Bratman (2014, 8)</span>: ‘This is the
continuity thesis. As we might try saying: once God created individual
planning agents and placed those agents in a world in which they have
relevant knowledge of each other’s minds, nothing fundamentally
new-conceptually, metaphysically, or normatively-needs to be added for
there to be modest sociality.’<a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn6"><p>Here I am assuming Ontological Innocence, which is a
controversial claim <span class="citation"
data-cites="linnebo:2022_plural">(Linnebo 2022, sec. 5)</span>.<a
href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn7"><p>Note that this line of objection could be pursued
independently of whether intentions are mental states. On some views,
intentions are not mental states <span class="citation"
data-cites="thompson:2008_life russell:2018_intention">(Thompson 2008;
Russell 2018)</span> but having them might nevertheless require having a
mind.<a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn8"><p>Alternative motivation for intentions without much in
the way of other mental states is offered by Bratman’s characterisation
of what he calls ‘social-procedural-rule-based institutional Intentions’
<span class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2022_shared">(Bratman 2022a,
147–50)</span>.<a href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn9"><p>I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for observing
that <span class="citation" data-cites="rovane:1998_bounds">Rovane
(1998, 137ff)</span> offers an extended discussion of the possibility
that very committed people might, over time, achieve such a high degree
of rational unity that ‘it would not be possible to engage just one of
its human constituents separately’ (p. 141). (The scenario I am
imagining is merely one in which being a plural subject is taken as a
normative ideal.)<a href="#fnref9" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn10"><p>See
https://correctiv.org/top-stories/2021/10/21/cumex-files-2/<a
href="#fnref10" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn11"><p>The construction is borrowed from <span
class="citation" data-cites="Bacharach:2006fk">Bacharach (2006)</span>
and <span class="citation" data-cites="Sugden:2000mw">Sugden
(2000)</span>. I am not claiming that their views require aggregate
subjects, only that some of their ideas can be (mis?)used to develop the
aggregate subject strategy.<a href="#fnref11" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn12"><p>Whereas <span class="citation"
data-cites="Gold:2007zd">Gold and Sugden (2007)</span> appear to defend
their view as the only kind of shared intention, <span class="citation"
data-cites="pacherie:2013_lite">Pacherie (2013)</span> explicitly offers
a view on which the aggregate subject strategy and the reductive
strategy each characterise forms of shared intention. Also, as none of
these researchers present their views as involving aggregate subjects,
my suggestion is only that we can use their ideas in pursuing the
aggregate subject strategy.<a href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn13"><p>See <span class="citation"
data-cites="Schiffer:1987zb">Schiffer (1987, 265)</span>: ‘if one were
to make a list of all the things philosophers have in mind when they
talk of “theories of meaning or intentional content,” then I would claim
that there are no true theories satisfying the descriptions on that
list. The questions being asked [...] that would require positive
theories as answers all have false presuppositions.’<a href="#fnref13"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn14"><p>Individual theorists have expressed both views. For
instance, <span class="citation"
data-cites="ludwig_collective_2007">Ludwig (2007)</span> positions his
view as characterising something distinct from Bratman’s, while <span
class="citation" data-cites="pacherie:2013_lite">Pacherie (2013)</span>
positions her view as a revision of Bratman’s. My question is whether
interpreting their views contrary to their statements would be
theoretically coherent.<a href="#fnref14" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn15"><p>There is room for uncertainty about whether Gilbert’s
theory meets the requirement about no fundamental discontinuities. <span
class="citation" data-cites="smith:2015_shared">Smith (2015,
55ff)</span> argues that it does, at least ‘to the extent that
Bratman’s’ does. <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2015_shareda">Bratman (2015, 75)</span> objects to
this claim on the grounds that ‘[t]he capacity to participate in the
creation of [...] plural commitments does [...] go beyond capacities
that are involved in individual agency.’<a href="#fnref15"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn16"><p>Searle does not use the term ‘we-intention’, which was
notably used by <span class="citation"
data-cites="tuomela_we-intentions_1988">Tuomela and Miller
(1988)</span>. (Those authors credit <span class="citation"
data-cites="sellars:1963_imperatives">Sellars (1963)</span>, although he
does not use exactly that term.) Following <span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert:2007_searle">Gilbert (2007, 33)</span>, it has
become common to use this term in discussing Searle.<a href="#fnref16"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn17"><p><span class="citation"
data-cites="linnebo:2022_plural">Linnebo (2022, sec. 5)</span>
identifies this as ‘the traditional view in analytic philosophy’ (which
Linnebo does not endorse).<a href="#fnref17" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn18"><p>I am grateful to an anonymous referee for suggesting
this possibility.<a href="#fnref18" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn19"><p>See, for example, <span class="citation"
data-cites="Tomasello:2007gl">Tomasello and Carpenter (2007)</span>,
<span class="citation" data-cites="Rakoczy:2007ou">Rakoczy and Tomasello
(2007)</span>, <span class="citation" data-cites="Moll:2007gu">Moll and
Tomasello (2007)</span> and <span class="citation"
data-cites="Grafenhain:2010zl">Gräfenhain et al. (2009)</span>. Note
that these researchers smoosh together incompatible philosophical
theories when introducing notions of shared intention. The insights
being applied are common to many theories and do not depend on the
correctness of any one theory.<a href="#fnref19" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn20"><p>For an illustration of how this might begin, see <span
class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2014_book">Bratman (2014, chap.
6)</span> who investigates how a reductive approach may enable the
construction of plural and aggregate subjects.<a href="#fnref20"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn21"><p>See <span class="citation"
data-cites="gomez-lavin:2019_normativity">Gomez-Lavin and Rachar
(2019)</span>. Although their study is not directly concerned with
shared intention, their approach may illuminate how their participants
represent joint activities.<a href="#fnref21" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
</ol>
</section>
</div>