--- 
title: "Towards a Mechanistically Neutral Account of Acting Jointly: The Notion of a Collective Goal "
authors: "Stephen A. Butterfill and Corrado Sinigaglia"
year: 2022
isForthcoming: true
journal: "Mind"
volume: "fzab096"
number: "1"
pages: "1-29"
doi: "10.1093/mind/fzab096"
pdfUrl: "/pdf/collective_goals.pdf"
bibtex: "@article{butterfill:2022_mechanistically,\n    author = {Butterfill, Stephen A and Sinigaglia, Corrado},\n    date-modified = {2022-05-09 11:13:42 +0100},\n    doi = {10.1093/mind/fzab096},\n    issn = {0026-4423},\n    journal = {Mind},\n    number = {525},\n    pages = {1–29},\n    shorttitle = {Towards a {{Mechanistically Neutral Account}} of {{Acting Jointly}}},\n    title = {Towards a {{Mechanistically Neutral Account}} of {{Acting Jointly}}: {{The Notion}} of a {{Collective Goal}}},\n    volume = {132},\n    year = {2022},\n    bdsk-url-1 = {https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/fzab096}\n}\n\n"
featured: true
---




<div class="fulltext">

<h1 id="sec:abstract"><strong>Abstract</strong></h1>
<div class='abstract'>
Anyone who has ever walked, cooked or crafted with a friend is in a position to know that acting jointly is not just acting side-by-side.  But what distinguishes acting jointly from acting in parallel yet merely individually?  Four decades of philosophical research have yielded broad consensus on a strategy for answering this question.  This strategy is emph{mechanistically committed}; that is, it hinges on invoking states of the agents who are acting jointly (often dubbed ‘shared’, ‘we-’ or ‘collective’ intentions).  Despite the consensus, enduring disagreement remains. The disagreement may be a consequence of the strategy; at least this is plausible enough to motivate considering the prospects for an alternative. Our aim is therefore to draw attention to a coherent alternative that is present in the literature but often overlooked. This alternative is emph{mechanistically neutral}: it avoids invoking states of agents. Implementing the alternative, we introduce the notion of a collective goal and a characterisation of acting jointly which meets criteria standardly used in evaluating other accounts and may
</div>

<h1 id="sec:intro"><strong>Introduction</strong></h1>
<p><span id="sec:problems" data-label="sec:problems"></span></p>
<p>Many of the things we do are, or could be, done with others. Mundane
examples favoured by philosophers include painting a house together
<span class="citation" data-cites="Bratman:1992mi">(Bratman
1992)</span>, lifting a heavy sofa together <span class="citation"
data-cites="Velleman:1997oo">(Velleman 1997)</span>, preparing a
hollandaise sauce together <span class="citation"
data-cites="Searle:1990em">(Searle 1990)</span>, going to Chicago
together <span class="citation" data-cites="Kutz:2000si">(Kutz
2000)</span>, and walking together <span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert_walking_1990">(Gilbert 1990)</span>. These examples
are supposed to be paradigm cases of a phenomenon, or class of
phenomena, we shall call <em>acting jointly</em>, although a variety of
labels have been used. <a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> To delimit which cases are of
interest, philosophers have also contrasted things they take to be cases
of acting jointly with things they take to be cases of people merely
acting in parallel with each other. For instance, when members of a
flash mob in the Central Cafe respond to a pre-arranged cue by noisily
opening their newspapers in order to create a salient marker for the
opening of their performance, they are held to be acting jointly. But
when someone not part of the mob just happens to noisily open her
newspaper in response to the same cue, she is held to be acting in
parallel with the others but merely individually. <a href="#fn2"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> To
give another example, two former members of the mob are held to be
acting jointly when they later walk to the metro station together. But
two people who merely happen to be walking to the metro station
side-by-side among a crowd of people heading that way are held to be
acting in parallel but merely individually. (This example is adapted
from <span class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2014_book">Bratman
(2014, 5–6)</span>, who borrowed it from <span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert_walking_1990">Gilbert (1990)</span>.) These paradigm
and contrast cases invite the question, What features distinguish acting
jointly from acting in parallel but merely individually?</p>
<p>Although some philosophers may question some of these claims about
paradigm cases and contrast cases, <a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref3" role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> we shall follow those
cited above in assuming, provisionally, <a href="#fn4"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a>
that reflection on the examples and contrasts can ensure sufficient
agreement on the topic that it makes sense to ask which features
distinguish acting jointly from acting in parallel but merely
individually. This assumption is consistent with neutrality both on
whether there is just one distinction or several to be drawn, and also
on which of the above claims about paradigm cases and contrast cases are
correct.</p>
<p>A standard strategy for distinguishing acting jointly from acting in
parallel but merely individually involves invoking states of the agents
who are acting jointly, often dubbed ‘we-’, ‘shared’ or ‘collective
intentions’. <a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> The idea, very roughly, is that
acting jointly (or one kind of acting jointly if there are several) is
distinguished from acting in parallel but merely individually by these
states playing some particular role. The central task, on this strategy,
is to characterise the states and their explanatory relation to acting
jointly (compare <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014, 10)</span>). There is,
however, considerable debate about the nature of the states on which
this distinction hinges. Some hold that the states in question involve a
novel attitude <span class="citation"
data-cites="Searle:1990em gallotti:2013_social">(Searle 1990; Gallotti
and Frith 2013)</span>. Others have explored the notion that the primary
distinguishing feature of these states is not the kind of attitude
involved but rather the kind of subject, which is plural <span
class="citation" data-cites="helm_plural_2008">(Helm 2008)</span>. Or
they may differ from ordinary intentions in involving distinctive
obligations or commitments to others (<span class="citation"
data-cites="Gilbert:1992rs">(Gilbert 1992)</span>; <span
class="citation" data-cites="Roth:2004ki">(Roth 2004)</span>). <a
href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a> Or perhaps the most fundamental
distinguishing mark of these states is the way they arise, namely
through team reasoning <span class="citation"
data-cites="Gold:2007zd pacherie:2013_lite">(Gold and Sugden 2007;
Pacherie 2013)</span>. Opposing all such views, <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1992mi bratman:2014_book">Bratman (1992,
2014)</span> argues that the distinctive states, which he calls ‘shared
intentions’, can be realised by multiple ordinary individual intentions
and other attitudes whose contents interlock in a distinctive way. <a
href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> Bratman’s approach has inspired a
family of accounts along broadly these lines, including <span
class="citation" data-cites="asarnow:2020_shared">Asarnow (2020)</span>,
<span class="citation" data-cites="blomberg:2015_common">Blomberg
(2016)</span>, <span class="citation"
data-cites="ludwig_collective_2007 ludwig:2016_individual">Ludwig (2007,
2016)</span> and <span class="citation"
data-cites="Tollefsen:2005vh">Tollefsen (2005)</span>.</p>
<p>How are we to determine when any two of these accounts should be
regarded as competing attempts to characterise a single phenomenon and
when they should be regarded as compatible attempts to characterise
different phenomena? And how are we to single out, from among all of
these accounts, those which are correct? The growing number and
increasing diversity of accounts make urgent these twin problems. It may
be that they can be solved. But we believe that there is sufficient
doubt to motivate investigating an alternative to the standard strategy,
one which makes available a distinctive way of singling out correct
accounts. And our aim in this paper is to do just this.</p>
<p>In investigating an alternative strategy, we are not promising to
adjudicate among accounts which follow the standard strategy. However,
we will show how those accounts can be recast in line with the
alternative strategy and their main insights adjudicated. To anticipate,
one consequence of this will be that some accounts which appeared
incompatible from the point of view of the standard strategy turn out
not to be incompatible when recast.</p>
<h1 id="sec:alternative_strategy"><strong>An alternative
strategy</strong></h1>
<p>Proponents of what we call the standard strategy differ in important
ways but have one thing in common: in attempting to distinguish acting
jointly from acting in parallel but merely individually, they are
invoking states of the agents. On the standard strategy, there is no way
of drawing this distinction without being committed to a claim about
which states, or structures of states, cause the actions agents perform
when they act jointly.</p>
<p>To see that this is not the only possible strategy, consider
philosophical accounts of ordinary, individual action. We might ask,
following <span class="citation" data-cites="Davidson:1971fz">Davidson
(1971)</span>, what distinguishes those events which are actions from
events which merely happen to an agent? In answering this question many
have, like Davidson, focussed on intentional actions only. Some
philosophers answer the question by saying—to put it very roughly and
incompletely—that intentional actions are those caused in a certain way
by beliefs, desires, intentions or other kinds of state. <a href="#fn8"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref8" role="doc-noteref"><sup>8</sup></a>
This is an example of what we shall call a <em>mechanistically
committed</em> answer: that is, an answer which involves making
commitments concerning which states, or structures of states, cause
intentional actions. Although this is the dominant approach, and one
which has provided a framework for much philosophy of action (<span
class="citation" data-cites="brand:1984_intending">(Brand 1984)</span>
is a nice illustration), it is not the only way philosophers have
attempted to answer the question. An intentional action may be
characterised, very roughly and incompletely, as an action that happens
because its agent has certain reasons for bringing an outcome about, or
at least for attempting to do so. This is an example of what we shall
call a <em>mechanistically neutral</em> answer: that is, one which does
not involve making commitments concerning which states, or structures of
states, cause intentional actions. <a href="#fn9" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref9" role="doc-noteref"><sup>9</sup></a></p>
<p>Proponents of a mechanistically neutral characterisation need not
deny that intentional actions are caused by intentions or other states
of agents. They merely insist on separating two questions:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>What distinguishes intentional actions from things which merely
happen to an agent (and from nonintentional actions, if there are
any)?</p></li>
<li><p>Which states cause intentional actions?</p></li>
</ol>
<p>All sides can agree that fully understanding action requires
answering both questions (and more). <a href="#fn10"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref10" role="doc-noteref"><sup>10</sup></a>
But whereas a mechanistically committed characterisation answers the
first question in a way that involves answering, partially or wholly,
the second, a mechanistically neutral characterisation answers the first
question in a way that does not. <a href="#fn11" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref11" role="doc-noteref"><sup>11</sup></a> What makes an approach
mechanistically neutral is not the pattern of answers given to the
questions but the recognition that the answers are to an interesting
degree theoretically independent.</p>
<p>To see when a mechanistically neutral characterisation could be
useful, consider Bratman’s position as an example. He allows that
actions can be intentional ‘even though [the agent] has no distinctive
attitude of intending’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1987xw">(Bratman 1987, 132)</span>, and even though
the agent lacks the capacity to form intentions altogether <span
class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2000_valuing">(Bratman 2000,
51)</span>. This view follows from two claims: first, intentions are
distinct from any combination of beliefs and desires; and second,
beliefs and desires alone may, in certain cases, determine what an agent
intentionally does. Of course, this second claim would make no sense if
we answered the first question above by saying that intentional actions
are things caused by intentions. But Bratman’s position clearly makes
sense if we rely on a mechanistically neutral characterisation of
intentional action. If we anchor the notion of intentional action by
saying that intentional actions are things which happen because an agent
has reasons, we can then coherently postulate variety in the states and
processes which cause intentional actions.</p>
<p>Until now we have considered approaches which focus on intentional
actions only. But this is not the only coherent approach. Another
possibility is to first characterise a notion of purposive action
(invoking goals) and then elaborate on this in characterising
intentional action (invoking reasons concerning the goals). In this case
there is also a divide between mechanistically committed and
mechanistically neutral characterisations. A purposive action is an
action directed to one or more goals. Some take goals to be states of
agents <span class="citation" data-cites="austin:1996_goal">(Austin and
Vancouver 1996, 338)</span>. Any characterisation relying on such a
notion of goal is mechanistically committed: purposive actions are
characterised in terms of states which cause them. By contrast, others
have used ‘goal’ as a label for those outcomes to which an action is
directed <span class="citation" data-cites="wilson:2016_action">(e.g.
Wilson, Shpall, and Pin̄eros Glasscock 2016)</span> and have offered, or
relied on, mechanistically neutral characterisations of purposive action
(<span class="citation" data-cites="Bennett:1976rg">(Bennett 1976,
42)</span>; <span class="citation"
data-cites="Butterfill:2001kc">(Butterfill 2001)</span>; <span
class="citation" data-cites="Gergely:1995sq Csibra:2007hm">(Gergely et
al. 1995; Csibra and Gergely 2007)</span>; <span class="citation"
data-cites="Wright:1976ls">(Wright 1976)</span>).</p>
<p>How does any of this bear on our question about which features
distinguish acting jointly from acting in parallel but merely
individually? Consideration of ordinary, individual action suggests two
things. First, that it may also be possible to provide a mechanistically
neutral characterisation of acting jointly. And, second, that it is
coherent not to focus exclusively on a notion of acting jointly where
acting jointly is intentional. We can therefore separate two
questions:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>What distinguishes acting jointly from acting in parallel but
merely individually?</p></li>
<li><p>Which states cause the actions agents perform when they act
jointly?</p></li>
</ol>
<p>We shall extend our terminology and distinguish <em>mechanistically
committed</em> from <em>mechanistically neutral</em> answers to the
first question according to whether they do, or do not, involve making
commitments concerning the second question.</p>
<p>Giving a mechanistically neutral answer is consistent with denying
that the second question bears on the first at all, perhaps because you
see the first as a normative question and one quite separate from any
concern about causes. But, as we explain in §<a
href="#sec:objection-evidence" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:objection-evidence">7</a>, giving a mechanistically
neutral answer is also consistent with allowing that the questions are
mutually constraining.</p>
<p>In what follows, we explore the prospects for an alternative strategy
which deviates from the standard strategy in aiming to provide a
mechanistically neutral characterisation. The initial focus is not on
joint counterparts of intentional action but on the notion of acting
jointly (allowing that intentional cases of acting jointly may
eventually turn out to be in some respect more fundamental). We shall
argue that the alternative yields a characterisation of acting jointly
which, although probably incomplete, meets criteria standardly used in
evaluating other accounts. We shall also argue that the alternative
strategy offers an advantage in solving the twin problems from §<a
href="#sec:intro" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:intro">1</a>: the problem of singling out correct
accounts, and the problem of determining when two accounts are competing
attempts to characterise a single phenomenon rather than compatible
attempts to characterise different phenomena.</p>
<h1 id="sec:collective_vs_distributive"><strong>Collective vs
distributive</strong></h1>
<p>This and the following sections sketch a mechanistically neutral
answer to the question, What distinguishes acting jointly from acting in
parallel but merely individually? We focus initially on the purposive
aspect of acting jointly, and will only later (in §<a
href="#sec:intentional" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:intentional">8</a>) turn to its intentional aspect.
Just as the notion of a goal is central to any account of ordinary,
individual purposive action, so our central notion will be that of a
collective goal. In order to introduce this notion (in §<a
href="#sec:collective_goals" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_goals">5</a>), we first need to clarify
how we will use the term ‘collective’ (in this section) and what it
means for an action to have a goal (in §<a href="#sec:goals"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:goals">4</a>).</p>
<p>Consider these sentences:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>The tiny leaves fell from the tree.</p></li>
<li><p>The tiny leaves blocked the drain.</p></li>
</ol>
<p>The first sentence is naturally read <em>distributively</em>; that
is, as specifying something that each leaf did individually. Perhaps
first one leaf fell, then another fell. But the second sentence is
naturally read <em>collectively</em>. No one leaf blocked the drain;
rather the blocking was something that the leaves accomplished together.
For the sentence to be true on this collective reading, the tiny leaves’
blocking the drain cannot be, or cannot only be, a matter of each leaf
blocking the drain. <a href="#fn12" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref12"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
<p>Now consider an example involving actions and their outcomes:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>Those thoughtless actions blocked the drain.</p></li>
</ol>
<p>This sentence can be read in at least two ways, distributively or
collectively. We can read it distributively as concerning a sequence of
actions done over a period of time, each of which blocked the drain. In
this case, the truth of the sentence is just a matter of the same type
of outcome, namely blocking the drain, being an outcome of each action.
Alternatively we can read it as concerning several actions which have
this outcome collectively—perhaps a bunch of people dropped cigarette
butts into the drain more or less simultaneously. In this case the
outcome, blocking the drain, is not necessarily an outcome of any of the
individual actions, but it is an outcome of all of them taken together
(or, depending on your views about the semantics of plural
quantification, an outcome of one thing that somehow bundles together
the actions). This is the collective reading.</p>
<p>Note that the difference is not merely terminological. To see this,
consider how many times the drain must have been blocked. On the
distributive reading it was blocked at least as many times as there were
actions. On the collective reading it was not necessarily blocked more
than once. So the difference between collective and distributive is not
just a matter of words: it concerns how the actions and outcomes are
related.</p>
<h1 id="sec:goals"><strong>Goals</strong></h1>
<p>Our aim (in the next section) will be to show that there are
collective readings not only of sentences about the actual outcomes of
actions but also of sentences about the outcomes to which actions are
directed—that is, about the goals of actions. <a href="#fn13"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref13" role="doc-noteref"><sup>13</sup></a>
To this end we first need to say what it is for an action to be directed
to an outcome.</p>
<p>The challenge is to cash out the metaphor of directedness. One
familiar response involves intention. To a first approximation, the
directedness of an action to an outcome consists in an agent acting on
an intention where the intention plays a role in coordinating (and maybe
in planning) the agent’s actions in such a way that would normally
facilitate the outcome’s occurrence. This is one coherent way of
thinking about directedness. But it may not be the whole story about the
goals of actions. For some have argued that actions can be directed to
outcomes in virtue of states other than intentions, including desires
<span class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2000_valuing">(e.g. Bratman
2000)</span> and motor representations <span class="citation"
data-cites="butterfill:2012_intention">(e.g. Butterfill and Sinigaglia
2014)</span>. Note that regardless of which states of an agent
(intentions or others) are invoked, we can use the same basic pattern:
directedness is grounded by states which coordinate the action in such a
way that would normally facilitate the outcome’s occurrence. <a
href="#fn14" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref14"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>14</sup></a></p>
<p>Is it possible to characterise directedness without appealing to any
states of an agent at all? <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bennett:1976rg">Bennett (1976, 61)</span> suggests that the
directedness of an action to an outcome is a matter of the agent acting
because she is ‘so structured and situated’ as to do things which
increase the probability of the outcome occurring. We take Bennett to be
introducing two ideas. First, directedness is not always only a matter
of states of the agent but can also involve her environment and history.
Second, directedness can be characterised independently of any
particular mechanism. Borrowing these ideas we can draw a parallel with
the core idea about intention mentioned above: the directedness of an
action to an outcome consists in there being a state, structure or
situation which plays a role in coordinating the agent’s actions in such
a way that would normally facilitate the outcome’s occurrence. <a
href="#fn15" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref15"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>15</sup></a> The state, structure or situation
may be intention, habit, biological function or other
behaviour-organizing circumstance connecting the agent’s actions to the
outcome (or any combination of these). The key to characterising
directedness is not any specific state, structure or situation but the
role of those in linking actions to outcomes.</p>
<p>This proposal about directedness is, to put it politely,
theoretically modest. It captures nothing but the bare structure of how
actions and goals relate. (And even that incompletely, for goals can be
partially ordered by the means–ends relation and actions by the
part–whole relation; directedness needs to be understood, more
generally, as a relation of structures of actions to structures of
outcomes.) But theoretical modesty is an advantage in one respect: the
proposal leaves open for discovery questions about what it is in virtue
of which actions are directed to outcomes.</p>
<p>This openness is valuable because we can make discoveries about the
goals of particular actions without yet knowing anything about the kind
of state, structure or situation in virtue of which the actions are
directed to the goal. For example, consider that ant behaviour is
routinely and uncontroversially characterized in terms of goals:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>The ants protect their fungal cultivar from pathogens and parasites,
provide the fungus with a constant source of nutrients, and aid in its
growth and dispersal. […] To promote the initial degradation of plant
biomass this material is masticated, mixed with ant fecal droplets, and
inoculated with fungal mycelia. <span class="citation"
data-cites="scott:2010_microbial">(Scott et al. 2010, e9922)</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Facts about the specific goals of the ants’ actions are important
discoveries. But for the most part, these discoveries were made
independently of much insight into what grounds the directedness of the
actions to the goals. Indeed, discoveries about goals are often
foundational for understanding mechanisms. To illustrate with another
species, knowing that the goal of certain actions is hunting enabled the
discovery that portid spiders use information about routes to prey even
after that information is no longer available in their environment <span
class="citation" data-cites="jackson:2011_spider">(Jackson and Cross
2011, 118–21)</span>, suggesting that representation may be
involved.</p>
<p>One quirk of our proposal is that we have characterised directedness
as linking actions, not agents, to outcomes. Our concern here is to
avoid a commitment. Consider:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>The goal of her action is to compost the leaf cuttings.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>and:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Her goal is to compost the leaf cuttings.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>To some, the first may sound like an awkward paraphrase of the
second. But others might deny that the first implies the second—perhaps
on the grounds that the first can be true of ants but ants cannot have
goals; or perhaps on the grounds that actions can be subagential in
something like the way that (on some views) mental states can be
subpersonal. To avoid such controversies, we characterise directedness
as a relation between an action and an outcome. However what follows
could be adapted to work with directedness as a relation between agents
and outcomes.</p>
<h1 id="sec:collective_goals"><strong>Collective goals</strong></h1>
<p>Having clarified our use of ‘collective’ (in §<a
href="#sec:collective_vs_distributive" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_vs_distributive">3</a>) and characterised
goals (in the previous section) we are in a position to see how the
distinction between collective and distributive readings appears to
apply to sentences concerning the goals of actions. Consider the
sentence:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>Those actions had the goal of blocking the drain.</p></li>
</ol>
<p>Whereas the previous sentence (in §<a
href="#sec:collective_vs_distributive" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_vs_distributive">3</a>) was about causal
relations between actions and outcomes, this sentence concerns
teleological relations. We claim that, like the previous sentence, this
sentence has both distributive and collective readings. On the
distributive reading, each of the actions had the goal of blocking the
drain. This would fit a sequence of events in which someone attempted to
block the drain first by covering it with a metal sheet and then, after
this failed to block it, removing the metal sheet and pouring cement
powder into it. On the collective reading, by contrast, the actions’
having the goal of blocking the drain was not, or not only, a matter of
each of the actions having that goal. This would fit an episode in which
someone maliciously and patiently blocks a drain by dropping just one
cigarette butt into it each day, counting on their accumulation to do
its work.</p>
<p>The collective reading also appears to be possible in many mundane
cases. Imagine kneading some dough. This involves a sequence of folding
and stretching actions, and perhaps adding some flour as you go. The
point of all this is to get the dough into a condition that it will
later rise in a particular way. So we might say, of the sequence, that
those actions had the goal of getting the dough into a state where it
will rise nicely. If we are describing an ordinary baking activity, this
statement would be true on a collective reading.</p>
<p>So far we have considered actions with just one agent. But we can
also read sentences about goals collectively when there are two or more
agents involved. After all, the examples of blocking the drain and
kneading the dough could just as well have involved two agents rather
than just one.</p>
<p>Where a sentence about some actions being directed to a single
outcome is true on the collective reading, we stipulate, as a matter of
terminology, that the actions are <em>collectively directed</em> to that
outcome and that the outcome is a <em>collective goal</em> of the
actions.</p>
<p>We have explicated the notion of a collective goal only negatively by
saying that it is not, or not only, a matter of each action individually
being directed to the outcome. What is it a matter of? One answer to
this question might involve using one of the existing theories about
states of agents to further explicate the notion of a collective goal.
This would be incompatible with our aim of being mechanistically
neutral, of course. But there are also other kinds of structure that can
ground collective goals. In the case of honey bees foraging <span
class="citation" data-cites="leadbeater:2005new">(Leadbeater and Chittka
2005)</span> or ants farming fungus (see §<a href="#sec:goals"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:goals">4</a>), what
underpins collective goals may be behavioural patterns, scent marks and
other signals which ensure coordination; and of course much the same may
be true in some situations involving humans too. In characterising
collective goals we therefore avoid invoking any particular states or
structures, just as we did in characterising goals (in §<a
href="#sec:goals" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:goals">4</a>). Indeed, our proposal about goals can
be extended to collective goals in a natural way by switching from
intra-agental to inter-agential coordination: the collective
directedness of some agents’ actions to an outcome consists in there
being a state, structure or situation which plays a role in coordinating
all the actions in such a way that would normally facilitate the
outcome’s occurrence.</p>
<p>Nothing that follows depends on the details of this proposal. We
require only that the collective readings of sentences about goals serve
to single out, within a limited but useful range of cases, which things
are collective goals.</p>
<h1 id="sec:collective-goal-account"><strong>The Collective Goal
Account</strong></h1>
<p>Can collective goals assist in providing a mechanistically neutral
account of how acting jointly differs from acting in parallel but merely
individually? Consider the least subtle attempt to give a positive
answer, which we will call <em>The Collective Goal Account</em>:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>When the actions of two or more agents have a collective goal, the
agents are, in performing those actions, acting jointly; otherwise they
are acting in parallel but merely individually.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>This account is neutral on which states of the agents make it the
case that their actions have a collective goal. It is consistent with,
but neutral on, the further claim that it is only ever in virtue of the
agents’ shared intentions that actions have collective goals.</p>
<p>How does this account fare with respect to the examples and contrast
cases we mentioned at the start of this paper? In giving the examples
standardly offered which we mentioned in opening this paper—painting a
house together, lifting a heavy sofa together, and the rest (see §<a
href="#sec:intro" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:intro">1</a>)—philosophers are distinguishing which
thing is occurring by specifying a goal (the lifting of the sofa, for
instance). And these examples do indeed appear to be cases where the
specified goal would typically be a collective goal. It can hardly be
very controversial, therefore, that one feature of standard examples is
the presence of a collective goal. <a href="#fn16" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref16" role="doc-noteref"><sup>16</sup></a></p>
<p>Next consider the two contrast cases we mentioned at the start of
this paper (in §<a href="#sec:intro" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:intro">1</a>). The first contrasted the actions of
members of a flash mob who noisily crack open their newspapers in order
to create a salient marker for the start of their performance with the
actions of the flash mob plus those of an onlooker who happens to crack
open her newspaper simultaneously in response to the same cue. The
actions of the flash mob would typically have a collective goal, namely
the creation of the salient marker. By contrast, there is no single
token outcome to which the onlooker’s actions plus the flash mob
members’ actions are directed. <a href="#fn17" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref17" role="doc-noteref"><sup>17</sup></a> It follows, of course,
that there is no collective goal. So invoking the notion of a collective
goal suffices to distinguish this contrast case.</p>
<p>The second contrast case was a contrast between two members of the
flash mob later walking to the metro station together, who (by
stipulation) are acting jointly, and two people who happen to be walking
to the station side-by-side among a crowd heading that way. The success
of the flash mob members’ activity requires at least that both walk to
the station. And this is just the kind of case in which the two agents’
arrival at the metro station would be a collective goal of their
actions. By contrast, when two people just happen to be walking to the
station side-by-side, one person’s actions may succeed even though the
other accidentally falls into the sewer through a hole and never reaches
the station. It follows that invoking the notion of a collective goal is
sufficient to distinguish this contrast case too.</p>
<p>Reflection on both contrast cases shows, however, that invoking the
notion of a collective goal is not necessary. There is a simpler way to
distinguish these contrast cases. Indeed, the presence or absence of a
single outcome to which all the agents’ actions are directed is already
sufficient to distinguish the contrast cases. Our appeal to collective
goals therefore lacks motivation. If the examples and contrast cases can
be dealt with just by invoking the existence of a single outcome to
which all agents’ actions are directed, why bother with the additional
complexity of collective goals?</p>
<p>An initially tempting idea is to introduce further contrast cases.
For instance:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Case 1: A bear has been spotted near each of two villages on either
side of a mountain. In each village there is a hunter who sets out to
hunt the bear. The villagers are entirely unaware of each other. Despite
tracking the bear from nearly opposite directions, the bear comes into
view for both hunters at the same time. Each takes a shot at it. Neither
shot is individually fatal, but sadly their combined effect kills the
bear.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<p>Case 2: Two friends from a city go hunting a bear together. They hide
in a tree waiting for the bear to come into view. When it does, each
takes a shot at it. Neither shot is individually fatal, but sadly their
combined effect kills the bear.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>As each villager justifiably regards herself as having succeeded in
her project, we can be confident that the actions of the villagers are
directed to a single outcome, namely the death of the bear. This implies
that there is a single outcome to which all their actions are directed.
So we cannot capture this contrast by appealing only to the idea that
the agents’ actions are all directed to a single outcome; this is a
feature of both cases. Nevertheless, there does appear to be a contrast
with respect to acting jointly between the villagers’ actions and those
of the city dwellers. We can capture this contrast by appeal to
collective goals. We might say, ‘The villagers’ actions had the goal of
killing the bear.’ This sentence is true on the distributive reading, as
each of them performed actions which were indeed directed to the goal of
killing the bear. But the sentence is untrue on the collective reading,
for there is nothing more to their actions having the goal of killing
the bear than that each villager individually performed actions directed
to this outcome. By contrast, actions performed by the two city dwellers
are coordinated in such a way that would normally facilitate the bear’s
killing and therefore collectively directed to this outcome (see §<a
href="#sec:collective_goals" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_goals">5</a>). So the Collective Goal
Account is able to distinguish acting jointly in this case.</p>
<p>We doubt that introducing further examples and contrast cases will be
sufficient, however. When we have given talks or shared drafts, there
are always researchers in the audience whose intuitions differ from what
we expect on just about any contrast case we have mentioned. Some
awkward dissenters want to say, for instance, that the village dwellers
are acting jointly no less than the city dwellers are. <a href="#fn18"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref18" role="doc-noteref"><sup>18</sup></a>
Others may dissent on the grounds that the presence of a collective goal
is insufficient for the city dwellers to be acting jointly. <a
href="#fn19" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref19"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>19</sup></a> Several lengthy conversations
combined with reflection on the diversity of philosophers’ accounts of
acting jointly have gradually shifted us away from thinking of the
awkward dissenters as people who just haven’t tuned in. Their dissent is
informative. Simply providing examples and contrast cases does not
reliably give an audience a single signal to tune in to. The contrast
cases on which there is little dissent do not enable us to lock on to
whatever phenomena those responsible for the leading accounts of acting
jointly are interested in; and the contrast cases with the potential to
do this are, to a sufficiently diverse audience, themselves too
controversial to put much weight on.</p>
<p>As far as examples and contrast cases go, we find no grounds for
preferring this account over a competitor (or conversely). In the next
section we shall therefore introduce another way of defending the
Collective Goal Account.</p>
<h1 id="sec:objection-evidence"><strong>How to defend a mechanistically
neutral account of acting jointly</strong></h1>
<p>Our problem is how to single out correct from incorrect attempts to
distinguish acting jointly from acting in parallel but merely
individually. The problem arises because it is possible to construct
multiple accounts—whether mechanistically committed (see §<a
href="#sec:intro" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:intro">1</a>) or mechanistically neutral (see §<a
href="#sec:collective-goal-account" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective-goal-account">6</a>)—where each account
will be found by at least some people to accord with how they
intuitively make the distinction. In this section we shall characterise
a strategy on which this problem is actually an advantage.</p>
<p>As mentioned in the introduction (§<a href="#sec:intro"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:intro">1</a>), the
mechanistically neutral strategy can be found in the literature.
Consider the approach of <span class="citation"
data-cites="Sebanz:2006yq">Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich
(2006)</span>, who offer this influential characterisation:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Joint action can be regarded as any form of social interaction
whereby two or more individuals coordinate their actions in space and
time to bring about a change in the environment. <span class="citation"
data-cites="Sebanz:2006yq">(Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich 2006,
70)</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Although this is offered as a ‘working definition’ and is not
supposed to provide deep insight (as it invokes social interaction,
which is hardly less difficult to pin down than joint action), it has
proven to be useful. We suggest its usefulness is due at least in part
to it clearly separating the thing to be explained from proposed
explanations of it. Opposing groups of researchers adopt the working
definition but propose different theories about the mechanisms of joint
action. The working definition provides the common ground necessary for
evaluating the various proposals and understanding them as broadly
compatible attempts to fill in details about the mechanisms which make
joint action possible (see <span class="citation"
data-cites="Knoblich:2010fk">(Knoblich, Butterfill, and Sebanz
2011)</span> for a review).</p>
<p>The working definition above was not intended to, and does not,
distinguish acting jointly from acting in parallel but merely
individually. This is no objection to <span class="citation"
data-cites="Sebanz:2006yq">Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich
(2006)</span>, of course. But it does mean that we cannot use it for our
aim of understanding this distinction. This is why we have considered
the Collective Goal Account (§<a href="#sec:collective-goal-account"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective-goal-account">6</a>).</p>
<p>The Collective Goal Account can be used in the same way as <span
class="citation" data-cites="Sebanz:2006yq">Sebanz, Bekkering, and
Knoblich (2006)</span>’s working definition. That is, we can consider it
as one attempt to characterise some aspect of a phenomenon. Whether we
eventually accept this attempt should depend on what we discover about
mechanisms underpinning collective goals. If it turns out that there is
at least one mechanism, this will increase our confidence that the
Collective Goal Account is correct.</p>
<p>Indeed, there is already one study which explicitly sets out to
establish a mechanism underpinning collective goals <span
class="citation" data-cites="dellagatta:2017_drawn">(della Gatta et al.
2017)</span>. These authors conclude that agents’ actions can have
collective goals in virtue of motor representations. This is not an
isolated finding. Other studies might be interpreted as indirectly
supporting the same conclusion about motor representations causing
actions agents perform when their actions have collective goals <span
class="citation"
data-cites="baus:2014_predicting clarke:2019_joint kourtis:2014_attention loehr:2015_sound Menoret:2013fk meyer:2013_higher-order novembre:2013_motor ramenzoni:2014_scaling schmitz:2017_corepresentation sacheli:2018_evidence sacheli:2021_mechanisms">(these
include Baus et al. 2014; Clarke et al. 2019; Kourtis et al. 2014; Loehr
and Vesper 2015; Ménoret et al. 2014; Meyer, Wel, and Hunnius 2013;
Novembre et al. 2014; Ramenzoni, Sebanz, and Knoblich 2014; Schmitz et
al. 2017; Sacheli, Arcangeli, and Paulesu 2018; Sacheli et al.
2021)</span>. Of course, fully defending—or decisively rejecting—the
idea that collective goals can be used in distinguishing acting jointly
from acting in parallel but merely individually would require careful
analysis of these findings, and perhaps further experimental
discoveries. While that is beyond the scope of this paper, we can
already say that the Collective Goal Account receives some support from
discoveries about mechanisms.</p>
<p>Should we therefore accept the Collective Goal Account? Not yet. Some
may object that some essential feature is missing, such as cooperation
<span class="citation" data-cites="Searle:1990em">(Searle 1990)</span>
or commitment <span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert:2014_book">(Gilbert 2013)</span>.</p>
<p>How could we discover whether the objections are justified? We need,
first, to construct mechanistically neutral accounts of cooperation and
commitment; then, second, to discover which states and processes
causally explain the actions one or another kind of agent performs when
she performs actions which are cooperative or committed in the relevant
ways; and, third, to understand whether such states and processes are
distinct from, or bound up with, those which enable two or more agents’
actions to have collective goals. If a feature such as cooperation or
commitment turns out to be enabled by the same states and processes that
enable collective goals, then we have grounds for rejecting or revising
the Collective Goal Account, and for regarding this feature as an
essential feature of (at least one kind of) acting jointly. But if such
a feature is enabled by clearly dissociable states and processes, we
would need alternative grounds for regarding it as an essential feature.
Given that all this is unknown at present, we cannot accept either the
objections or the Collective Goal Account.</p>
<p>Suppose, hypothetically, that the Collective Goal Account were
vindicated against the objections. It would not follow that the account
is uniquely correct, nor that notions such as cooperation and commitment
have no role in characterising acting jointly. Other mechanistically
neutral characterisations of acting jointly may be equally well
supported. In this case we might eventually conclude that there are
multiple correct ways of distinguishing acting jointly from acting in
parallel but merely individually. This form of pluralism about acting
jointly would be unproblematic because it is disciplined. It would be
analogous to discovering that dissociable systems map onto different
aspects of memory <span class="citation"
data-cites="jacoby:1991_process">(e.g. Jacoby 1991)</span>.</p>
<p>The approach we are describing is not limited to defending the
Collective Goal Account. Here is the general idea. Start by being
maximally permissive in considering any proposed mechanistically neutral
account of acting jointly, requiring only that the account is a
conceivably successful attempt to capture cases reasonably taken to be
paradigms of acting jointly. <a href="#fn20" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref20" role="doc-noteref"><sup>20</sup></a> Next attempt to
discover which states and processes might enable the features identified
by these mechanistically neutral accounts to be exhibited by actual
agents. Where no such states or processes can be discovered, the
mechanistically neutral account may be disregarded. Where multiple
accounts specify features which are all enabled by the same, or
overlapping, states and processes, there is a case for treating those
mechanistically neutral accounts as fragments of some larger, unified
account. And where distinctive states and processes enable features
specified by just one mechanistically neutral account, this indicates
that the account captures one distinction between acting jointly and
acting in parallel but merely individually.</p>
<p>This way of defending mechanistically neutral accounts may be
relevant to a conflict between proponents of leading characterisations
of acting jointly. Consider two well-known attempts to specify shared
intention and its explanatory relation to action. <span class="citation"
data-cites="gilbert:2014_book">Gilbert (2013, 10)</span> does this in
terms of a special kind of mutual obligation which she labels <em>joint
commitment</em>, <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">Bratman (2014, 7)</span> in terms of
interpersonal coordination of planning. Both present themselves as
offering incompatible accounts of a single phenomenon (<span
class="citation" data-cites="gilbert:2014_nature">(Gilbert 2014)</span>;
<span class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014,
chap. 5)</span>).</p>
<p>Suppose we wanted to address this conflict using the above way of
defending mechanistically neutral accounts. We could use elements from
each protagonist to construct a mechanistically neutral adaptation of
their account. <a href="#fn21" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref21"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>21</sup></a> In Gilbert’s case, this would be an
account on which, roughly, the directedness of actions to outcomes
involves an element of commitment. Where some agents are jointly
committed to bringing an outcome about, their actions are directed to
this outcome insofar as they are guided by this commitment. As long as
joint commitment is understood in a way that does not involve any
particular states of the agents, this could yield a mechanistically
neutral characterisation. In Bratman’s case, instead of using ideas
about interpersonal coordination of planning to characterise shared
intention, we can use them as characterising shared agency directly. For
instance, we might consider that shared agency involves two or more
agents’ actions being directed to an outcome where the directedness of
their action to this outcome consists not only in their actions being
coordinated in such a way that would normally facilitate the outcome’s
occurrence but also in there being a state, structure or situation which
plays a role in coordinating their plans and structuring their
bargaining and deliberation.</p>
<p>These mechanistically neutral adaptations may seem barely different
from Gilbert’s and Bratman’s original versions. Yet the difference
really is substantial because it affects whether the accounts are
incompatible and how correct accounts can be singled out. As adapted,
there are no immediate grounds to regard Gilbert’s account as
incompatible with an account which, like Bratman’s, centers on planning
abilities; nor conversely. After all, as in the case of the Collective
Goal Account, a mechanistically neutral adaptation of Gilbert would be
vindicated (or not) through discovering mechanisms which actually
underpin joint commitment and support acting jointly; and likewise for
Bratman on interpersonal coordination of planning. Any such vindication
is consistent, of course, with entirely different accounts also being
vindicated. There is a range of possibilities. Mechanisms underpinning
joint commitments could coincide with mechanisms underpinning other
mechanistically neutral accounts—perhaps, for instance, there is no
interpersonal coordination of planning without joint commitments. <a
href="#fn22" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref22"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>22</sup></a> This might motivate combining what
had initially appeared to be distinct mechanistically neutral accounts.
Alternatively, it may be that distinct mechanisms are involved, which
would lend support to the view that a mechanistically neutral adaptation
of Gilbert or of Bratman identifies one among several forms of acting
jointly. <a href="#fn23" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref23"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>23</sup></a></p>
<p>Adopting the mechanistically neutral strategy turns diversity in
people’s feelings about which cases are paradigms of acting jointly into
an advantage. It provides a way of answering questions about when two
accounts are incompatible attempts to characterise a single phenomenon
rather than compatible attempts to characterise different phenomena. To
single out which accounts of acting jointly succeed, we need to
investigate mechanisms underpinning their constructs.</p>
<h1 id="sec:intentional"><strong>From purposive to
intentional</strong></h1>
<p>As promised in §<a href="#sec:alternative_strategy"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:alternative_strategy">2</a>, our strategy for
characterising how acting jointly differs from acting in parallel but
merely individually deviates from the standard strategy in two respects.
Not only is it mechanistically neutral: it is also one which starts by
focussing on acting jointly without any prior assumption that this must
be understood as a joint counterpart of ordinary, individual intentional
action. This led us to the notion of a collective goal and a
corresponding attempt to characterise acting jointly. Invoking
collective goals is conceivably sufficient for capturing a sense in
which acting jointly can be purposive where the purposivity is not, or
not only, a matter of each agent’s actions being purposive (or so we
argued in §<a href="#sec:collective-goal-account"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective-goal-account">6</a>). But of course none
of this is sufficient to capture what many philosophers take the primary
target phenomena to be: cases where two or more agents’ acting jointly
is intentional. How might we provide a mechanistically neutral
characterisation of a joint counterpart of intentional action?</p>
<p>We noted earlier that an intentional action may be characterised,
very roughly and incompletely, as an action that happens because its
agent has certain reasons for bringing an outcome about, or at least for
attempting to do so. One striking feature of attempts to characterise
intentional action in this way is that they all rely, explicitly or
implicitly, on a particular way of individuating actions. Actions are
individuated by the outcomes to which they are directed. The reasons in
virtue of which an action is intentional are reasons which an agent has
for bringing about the outcome. Note that while this approach involves
no commitment to the existence of actions which are not intentional, it
does involve commitment to the possibility of individuating some actions
independently of features in virtue of which they are intentional. That
is, we are committed to a conceptual distinction between purposive and
intentional action.</p>
<p>A parallel account of acting jointly is possible. Intentional cases
of acting jointly may be characterised, very roughly and incompletely,
as actions that happen because their agents have certain reasons for
bringing an outcome about as a collective goal of their actions, or at
least for attempting to do so. <a href="#fn24" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref24" role="doc-noteref"><sup>24</sup></a> Given that this is a
coherent, and natural, extension of a characterisation of ordinary,
individual action, we conclude that it is probably possible to provide
at least one mechanistically neutral characterisation of acting jointly
where acting jointly is intentional.</p>
<p>This characterisation of acting jointly contrasts with
mechanistically committed characterisations. According to <span
class="citation" data-cites="ludwig:2015_shared">Ludwig (2015,
12)</span>, who is formulating a claim common to a range of views,
‘collective intentional activity in general should be seen as the result
of shared intentions being satisfied’. By contrast, on our
mechanistically neutral proposal, it should be seen as the result of
agents having reasons for bringing an outcome about as a collective goal
of their actions. Of course, it may turn out that these are
extensionally equivalent because no agents have such reasons without
having corresponding shared intentions. The disagreement concerns not
whether shared intentions are necessary but whether they (or any other
states of agents) need be invoked in characterising how acting jointly
differs from acting in parallel but merely individually.</p>
<h1 id="sec:conclusion"><strong>Conclusion</strong></h1>
<p>Our question was about which features distinguish acting jointly from
acting in parallel but merely individually. We observed that twin
problems face the standard, mechanistically committed strategy for
answering this question. These problems are how to determine when two
accounts should be regarded as competing attempts to characterise a
single phenomenon; and how to single out, from a growing number and
increasing diversity of accounts, those which are correct (§<a
href="#sec:intro" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:intro">1</a>). Taking these problems to motivate
considering an alternative, we set out to introduce and pursue a
mechanistically neutral strategy for characterising acting jointly.</p>
<p>To develop a mechanistically neutral account, we invoked
uncontroversial parts of a logical distinction between collective and
distributive prediction (§<a href="#sec:collective_vs_distributive"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_vs_distributive">3</a>) and we outlined a
mechanistically neutral account of goals (in §<a href="#sec:goals"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:goals">4</a>) in order to
introduce the notion of a collective goal (§<a
href="#sec:collective_goals" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective_goals">5</a>). According to what we call
the Collective Goal Account, when the actions of two or more agents have
a collective goal, the agents are, in performing those actions, acting
jointly (§<a href="#sec:collective-goal-account"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:collective-goal-account">6</a>). We also outlined an
attempt to capture intentional aspects of acting jointly (§<a
href="#sec:intentional" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:intentional">8</a>).</p>
<p>Our thesis is not that the Collective Goal Account is correct. We
introduced a method for defending mechanistically neutral accounts
borrowed from existing literature (§<a href="#sec:objection-evidence"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:objection-evidence">7</a>). This method partially
vindicates the Collective Goal Account but leaves open the possibility
that it is one among several significant ways of distinguishing acting
jointly from acting in parallel but merely individually. Indeed, we
showed that mechanistically neutral adaptations of leading accounts
might in principle be vindicated in the same way. Further, our
vindication allows that the Collective Goal Account may ultimately need
to incorporate mechanistically neutral characterisations of cooperation,
commitment, coordination and more besides. If this is right, the
Collective Goal Account is at best an incomplete first draft (albeit one
which is no worse than the leading accounts in handling contrast
cases)—but one that provides a platform on which proponents of planning
and joint commitment can build.</p>
<p>Many will reject mechanistically neutral characterisations of acting
jointly, not on the grounds that acting jointly necessarily involves
some kind of shared intention (this is consistent with a mechanistically
neutral characterisation, after all), but on the grounds that, as they
see things, there is a conceptual or constitutive connection between the
two. (Such a view might be motivated by reflection on <span
class="citation" data-cites="pacherie:2013_lite">(Pacherie
2013)</span>.) We have offered no argument against such opponents; nor
do we aim to do so. The issue should be decided according to which
strategy yields most progress in understanding what distinguishes acting
jointly. The mechanistically committed strategy has dominated discussion
to date but faces twin problems that may be challenging to overcome. By
contrast, the mechanistically neutral strategy avoids these problems and
is, we submit, a promising new contender. <a href="#fn25"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref25"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>25</sup></a></p>
<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
data-entry-spacing="0" role="list">
<div id="ref-alvarez:2016_reasons" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Alvarez, Maria. 2016. <span>“Reasons for <span>Action</span>:
<span>Justification</span>, <span>Motivation</span>,
<span>Explanation</span>.”</span> In <em>The <span>Stanford
Encyclopedia</span> of <span>Philosophy</span></em>, edited by Edward N.
Zalta. <span>Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-asarnow:2020_shared" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Asarnow, Samuel. 2020. <span>“Shared <span>Agency Without Shared
Intention</span>.”</span> <em>The Philosophical Quarterly</em>
forthcoming. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/pqaa012">https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/pqaa012</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-austin:1996_goal" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Austin, James, and Jeffrey Vancouver. 1996. <span>“Goal
<span>Constructs</span> in <span>Psychology</span>:
<span>Structure</span>, <span>Process</span>, and
<span>Content</span>.”</span> <em>Psychological Bulletin</em> 120 (3):
338–75.
</div>
<div id="ref-bach:1978_representational" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Bach, Kent. 1978. <span>“A Representational Theory of Action.”</span>
<em>Philosophical Studies</em> 34 (4): 361–79. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00364703">https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00364703</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-baier:1997_joint" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Baier, Annette C. 1997. <span>“Doing <span>Things With Others</span>:
<span>The Mental Commons</span>.”</span> In <em>Commonality and
Particularity in Ethics</em>, edited by Lilli Alanen, Sarah Heinamaa,
and Thomas Wallgren, 15–44. Palgrave Macmillan. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-25602-0_2">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-25602-0_2</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-baus:2014_predicting" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Baus, Cristina, Natalie Sebanz, Vania de la Fuente, Francesca Martina
Branzi, Clara Martin, and Albert Costa. 2014. <span>“<span
class="nocase">On predicting others’ words: Electrophysiological
evidence of prediction in speech production</span>.”</span>
<em><span>Cognition</span></em> <span>133</span> (2): 395–407. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2014.07.006">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2014.07.006</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bennett:1976rg" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Bennett, Jonathan. 1976. <em>Linguistic Behaviour</em>. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-blomberg:2015_shared" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Blomberg, Olle. 2015. <span>“Shared <span>Goals</span> and
<span>Development</span>.”</span> <em>The Philosophical Quarterly</em>
65 (258): 94–101. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/pqu059">https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/pqu059</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-blomberg:2015_common" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2016. <span>“Common <span>Knowledge</span> and
<span>Reductionism</span> about <span>Shared Agency</span>.”</span>
<em>Australasian Journal of Philosophy</em> 94 (2): 315–26. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2015.1055581">https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2015.1055581</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-brand:1984_intending" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Brand, Myles. 1984. <em>Intending and Acting: Toward a Naturalized
Action Theory</em>. <span>Cambridge, Massachusetts</span>: <span>MIT
Press</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1987xw" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Bratman, Michael E. 1987. <em>Intentions, Plans, and Practical
Reasoning</em>. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1992mi" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 1992. <span>“Shared Cooperative Activity.”</span> <em>The
Philosophical Review</em> 101 (2): 327–41.
</div>
<div id="ref-Bratman:1999fr" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 1997. <span>“I Intend That We <span>J</span>.”</span> In
<em>Contemporary Action Theory, Volume 2: Social Action</em>, edited by
Raimo Tuomela and Ghita Holmstrom-Hintikka. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
</div>
<div id="ref-bratman:2000_valuing" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2000. <span>“Valuing and the Will.”</span>
<em>No<span>û</span>s</em> 34 (supplement 14): 249–65. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/0029-4624.34.s14.13">https://doi.org/10.1111/0029-4624.34.s14.13</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-bratman:2014_book" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2014. <em>Shared Agency: A Planning Theory of Acting Together</em>.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. <a
href="http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199897933.001.0001">http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199897933.001.0001</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-brooks_joint_1981" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Brooks, D. H. M. 1981. <span>“Joint Action.”</span> <em>Mind</em>, New
series, 90 (357): 113–19. <a
href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/2253670">http://www.jstor.org/stable/2253670</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-brownell:2011_early" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Brownell, Celia A. 2011. <span>“Early <span>Developments</span> in
<span>Joint Action</span>.”</span> <em>Review of Philosophy and
Psychology</em> 2: 193–211. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-011-0056-1">https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-011-0056-1</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Butterfill:2001kc" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Butterfill, Stephen A. 2001. <span>“Two Kinds of Purposive
Action.”</span> <em>European Journal of Philosophy</em> 9 (2): 141–65.
</div>
<div id="ref-butterfill:2012_intention" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Butterfill, Stephen A., and Corrado Sinigaglia. 2014. <span>“Intention
and Motor Representation in Purposive Action.”</span> <em>Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research</em> 88 (1): 119–45. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1933-1592.2012.00604.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1933-1592.2012.00604.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Carpenter:2009wq" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Carpenter, Malinda. 2009. <span>“Just How Joint Is Joint Action in
Infancy?”</span> <em>Topics in Cognitive Science</em> 1 (2): 380–92.
</div>
<div id="ref-chant_unintentional_2007" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Chant, Sara Rachel. 2007. <span>“Unintentional Collective
Action.”</span> <em>Philosophical Explorations: An International Journal
for the Philosophy of Mind and Action</em> 10 (3): 245. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/13869790701535246">https://doi.org/10.1080/13869790701535246</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-clarke:2019_joint" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Clarke, Sam, Luke McEllin, Anna Francová, Marcell Székely, Stephen A.
Butterfill, and John Michael. 2019. <span>“Joint Action Goals Reduce
Visuomotor Interference Effects from a Partner’s Incongruent
Actions.”</span> <em>Scientific Reports</em> 9 (1): 1–9. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-52124-6">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-52124-6</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Csibra:2007hm" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Csibra, Gergely, and György Gergely. 2007. <span>“Obsessed with Goals’:
Functions and Mechanisms of Teleological Interpretation of Actions in
Humans.”</span> <em>Acta Psychologica</em> 124 (1): 60–78.
</div>
<div id="ref-Davidson:1971fz" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Davidson, Donald. 1971. <span>“Agency.”</span> In <em>Agent, Action, and
Reason,</em> edited by Robert Binkley, Richard Bronaugh, and Ausonia
Marras, 3–25. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/0199246270.001.0001">https://doi.org/10.1093/0199246270.001.0001</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-dellagatta:2017_drawn" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
della Gatta, Francesco, Francesca Garbarini, Marco Rabuffetti, Luca
Viganò, Stephen A. Butterfill, and Corrado Sinigaglia. 2017.
<span>“Drawn Together: <span>When</span> Motor Representations Ground
Joint Actions.”</span> <em>Cognition</em> 165: 53–60. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.04.008">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.04.008</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-dickinson:2016_instrumental" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Dickinson, Anthony. 2016. <span>“Instrumental Conditioning Revisited:
<span>Updating</span> Dual-Process Theory.”</span> In <em>Associative
Learning and Cognition</em>, edited by J. B. Trobalon and V. D. Chamizo,
51:177–95. <span>Edicions Universitat Barcelona</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Dretske:1988sq" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Dretske, Fred. 1988. <em>Explaining Behavior</em>. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-gallotti:2013_social" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Gallotti, Mattia, and Chris D. Frith. 2013. <span>“Social Cognition in
the We-Mode.”</span> <em>Trends in Cognitive Sciences</em> 17 (4):
160–65. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.002">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.002</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Gergely:1995sq" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Gergely, György, Z. Nadasky, Gergely Csibra, and S. Biro. 1995.
<span>“Taking the Intentional Stance at 12 Months of Age.”</span>
<em>Cognition</em> 56: 165–93.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert_walking_1990" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Gilbert, Margaret P. 1990. <span>“Walking Together: A Paradigmatic
Social Phenomenon.”</span> <em>Midwest Studies in Philosophy</em> 15:
1–14.
</div>
<div id="ref-Gilbert:1992rs" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 1992. <em>On Social Facts</em>. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-Gilbert:2010fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2010. <span>“Collective Action.”</span> In <em>A Companion to the
Philosophy of Action</em>, edited by Timothy O’Connor and Constantine
Sandis, 67–73. Oxford: Blackwell.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert:2014_book" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2013. <em>Joint Commitment: How We Make the Social World</em>.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. <a
href="http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199970148.001.0001">http://0-dx.doi.org.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199970148.001.0001</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-gilbert:2014_nature" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2014. <span>“The Nature of Agreements: A Solution to Some Puzzles
about Claim-Rights andJoint Intention1.”</span> In <em>Rational and
Social Agency: The Philosophy of Michael Bratman</em>, edited by Manuel
Vargas and Gideon Yaffe, 215–56. <span>Oxford</span>: Oxford University
Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-ginet:1990_action" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ginet, Carl. 1990. <em>On <span>Action</span></em>. <span>Cambridge
University Press</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Gold:2007zd" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Gold, Natalie, and Robert Sugden. 2007. <span>“Collective Intentions and
Team Agency.”</span> <em>Journal of Philosophy</em> 104 (3): 109–37.
</div>
<div id="ref-helm_plural_2008" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Helm, Bennett W. 2008. <span>“Plural Agents.”</span> <em>Nous</em> 42
(1): 17–49. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00672.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00672.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-jackson:2011_spider" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Jackson, Robert R., and Fiona R. Cross. 2011. <span>“Spider
<span>Cognition</span>.”</span> In <em>Advances in <span>Insect
Physiology</span></em>, edited by Jérôme Casas, 41:115–74. Spider
<span>Physiology</span> and <span>Behaviour</span>. <span>Academic
Press</span>. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-415919-8.00003-3">https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-415919-8.00003-3</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-jacoby:1991_process" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Jacoby, Larry L. 1991. <span>“A Process Dissociation Framework:
<span>Separating</span> Automatic from Intentional Uses of
Memory.”</span> <em>Journal of Memory and Language</em> 30 (5): 513–41.
<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(91)90025-F">https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(91)90025-F</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Knoblich:2010fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Knoblich, Günther, Stephen A. Butterfill, and Natalie Sebanz. 2011.
<span>“Psychological Research on Joint Action: Theory and Data.”</span>
In <em>Psychology of Learning and Motivation</em>, edited by Brian Ross,
51:59–101. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-kourtis:2014_attention" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kourtis, Dimitrios, Günther Knoblich, Mateusz Woźniak, and Natalie
Sebanz. 2014. <span>“<span class="nocase">Attention Allocation and Task
Representation during Joint Action Planning</span>.”</span>
<em><span>Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience</span></em> 26 (10):
2275–86. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00634">https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00634</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Kutz:2000si" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kutz, Christopher. 2000. <span>“Acting Together.”</span> <em>Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research</em> 61 (1): 1–31.
</div>
<div id="ref-laurence:2011_anscombian" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Laurence, Ben. 2011. <span>“An Anscombian Approach to Collective
Action.”</span> In <em>Essays on Anscombe’s Intention</em>. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-leadbeater:2005new" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Leadbeater, Ellouise, and Lars Chittka. 2005. <span>“A New Mode of
Information Transfer in Foraging Bumblebees?”</span> <em>Current
Biology</em> 15 (12): R447–48.
</div>
<div id="ref-Linnebo:2005ig" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Linnebo, Øystein. 2005. <span>“Plural Quantification.”</span> In <em>The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2005 Edition)</em>, edited
by Edward N. Zalta. Stanford, CA: Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University.
</div>
<div id="ref-loehr:2015_sound" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Loehr, Janeen D., and Cordula Vesper. 2015. <span>“The Sound of You and
Me: Novices Represent Shared Goals in Joint Action.”</span> <em>The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology</em> 0 (ja): 1–30. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1061029">https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1061029</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-longworth:2019_sharing" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Longworth, Guy. 2019. <span>“Sharing Non-Observational
Knowledge.”</span> <em>Inquiry</em> 0 (0): 1–21. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2019.1680430">https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2019.1680430</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ludwig_collective_2007" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ludwig, Kirk. 2007. <span>“Collective Intentional Behavior from the
Standpoint of Semantics.”</span> <em>Nous</em> 41 (3): 355–93. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00652.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2007.00652.x</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ludwig:2015_shared" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2015. <span>“Shared Agency in Modest Sociality.”</span> <em>Journal
of Social Ontology</em> 1 (1): 7–15. <a
href="http://www.degruyter.com/view/j/jso.2015.1.issue-1/jso-2014-0046/jso-2014-0046.xml">http://www.degruyter.com/view/j/jso.2015.1.issue-1/jso-2014-0046/jso-2014-0046.xml</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ludwig:2016_individual" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2016. <em>From <span>Individual</span> to <span>Plural
Agency</span>: <span>Collective Action</span></em>. <span>Oxford
University Press</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Menoret:2013fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ménoret, Mathilde, L. Varnet, R. Fargier, A. Cheylus, A. Curie, V. des
Portes, T. A. Nazir, and Y. Paulignan. 2014. <span>“Neural Correlates of
Non-Verbal Social Interactions: A Dual-EEG Study.”</span>
<em>Neuropsychologia</em> 55: 75–97.
</div>
<div id="ref-meyer:2013_higher-order" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Meyer, Marlene, Robrecht P. R. D. van der Wel, and Sabine Hunnius. 2013.
<span>“Higher-Order Action Planning for Individual and Joint Object
Manipulations.”</span> <em>Experimental Brain Research</em> 225 (4):
579–88. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3398-8">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3398-8</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-novembre:2013_motor" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Novembre, G., L. F. Ticini, S. Schutz-Bosbach, and P. E. Keller. 2014.
<span>“Motor Simulation and the Coordination of Self and Other in
Real-Time Joint Action.”</span> <em>Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience</em> 9 (8): 1062–68. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst086">https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst086</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Pacherie:2010fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Pacherie, Elisabeth. 2010. <span>“The Phenomenology of Joint Action:
Self-Agency Vs. Joint-Agency.”</span> In <em>Joint Action</em>, edited
by Axel Seemann. MIT Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-pacherie:2013_lite" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
———. 2013. <span>“Intentional Joint Agency: Shared Intention
Lite.”</span> <em>Synthese</em> 190 (10): 1817–39. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-013-0263-7">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-013-0263-7</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Pears:1971fk" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Pears, David. 1971. <span>“Two Problems about Reasons for
Actions.”</span> In <em>Agent, Action and Reason</em>, edited by A.
Marras R. Binkley R. Bronaugh, 128–53. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-petersson_collectivity_2007" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Petersson, Björn. 2007. <span>“Collectivity and Circularity.”</span>
<em>Journal of Philosophy</em> 104 (3): 138–56.
</div>
<div id="ref-pettit:2006_joint" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Pettit, Philip, and David Schweikard. 2006. <span>“Joint
<span>Actions</span> and <span>Group</span> <span>Agents</span>.”</span>
<em>Philosophy of the <span>Social</span> <span>Sciences</span></em> 36
(1): 18–39. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0048393105284169">https://doi.org/10.1177/0048393105284169</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-ramenzoni:2014_scaling" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Ramenzoni, Verónica C., Natalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich. 2014.
<span>“Scaling up Perception<span></span>action Links: Evidence from
Synchronization with Individual and Joint Action.”</span> <em>Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance</em> 40 (4):
1551–65. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036925">https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036925</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Roth:2004ki" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Roth, Abraham Sesshu. 2004. <span>“Shared Agency and Contralateral
Commitments.”</span> <em>The Philosophical Review</em> 113 (3): 359–410.
</div>
<div id="ref-sacheli:2018_evidence" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sacheli, Lucia Maria, Elisa Arcangeli, and Eraldo Paulesu. 2018.
<span>“Evidence for a Dyadic Motor Plan in Joint Action.”</span>
<em>Scientific Reports</em> 8 (1): 5027. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-23275-9">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-23275-9</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-sacheli:2021_mechanisms" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sacheli, Lucia Maria, Margherita Adelaide Musco, Elisa Zazzera, and
Eraldo Paulesu. 2021. <span>“Mechanisms for Mutual Support in Motor
Interactions.”</span> <em>Scientific Reports</em> 11 (1): 3060. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-82138-y">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-82138-y</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-schlosser:2019_agency" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Schlosser, Markus. 2019. <span>“Agency.”</span> In <em>The
<span>Stanford Encyclopedia</span> of <span>Philosophy</span></em>,
edited by Edward N. Zalta, Winter 2019. <span>Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Schmid:2008" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Schmid, Hans Bernhard. 2008. <span>“Plural Action.”</span>
<em><span>Philosophy of the Social Sciences</span></em> 38 (1): 25–54.
<a
href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0048393107310877">https://doi.org/10.1177/0048393107310877</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-schmitz:2017_corepresentation" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Schmitz, Laura, Cordula Vesper, Natalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich.
2017. <span>“Co-Representation of Others’ Task Constraints in Joint
Action.”</span> <em>Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception
and Performance</em> 43 (8): 1480–93. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000403">https://doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000403</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-scott:2010_microbial" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Scott, Jarrod J., Kevin J. Budsberg, Garret Suen, Devin L. Wixon, Teri
C. Balser, and Cameron R. Currie. 2010. <span>“Microbial <span>Community
Structure</span> of <span>Leaf</span>-<span>Cutter Ant Fungus
Gardens</span> and <span>Refuse Dumps</span>.”</span> <em>PLOS ONE</em>
5 (3): e9922. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009922">https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009922</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Searle:1990em" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Searle, John R. 1990. <span>“Collective Intentions and Actions.”</span>
In <em>Intentions in Communication</em>, edited by P. Cohen, J. Morgan,
and M. E. Pollack, 90–105. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-Sebanz:2006yq" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sebanz, Natalie, Harold Bekkering, and Günther Knoblich. 2006.
<span>“Joint Action: Bodies and Mind Moving Together.”</span> <em>Trends
in Cognitive Sciences</em> 10 (2): 70–76.
</div>
<div id="ref-Tollefsen:2005vh" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Tollefsen, Deborah. 2005. <span>“Let’s Pretend: Children and Joint
Action.”</span> <em>Philosophy of the Social Sciences</em> 35 (75):
74–97.
</div>
<div id="ref-tuomela:2000_cooperation" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Tuomela, Raimo. 2000. <em>Cooperation: <span>A Philosophical
Study</span></em>. Dordrecht: Springer.
</div>
<div id="ref-tuomela:1985_weintentions" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
Tuomela, Raimo, and Kaarlo Miller. 1985.
<span>“We-<span>Intentions</span> and <span>Social
Action</span>.”</span> <em>Analyse &amp; Kritik</em> 7 (1): 26–43. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1515/auk-1985-0102">https://doi.org/10.1515/auk-1985-0102</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-tuomela_we-intentions_1988" class="csl-entry"
role="listitem">
———. 1988. <span>“We-Intentions.”</span> <em>Philosophical Studies</em>
53 (3): 367–89. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00353512">https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00353512</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Velleman:1997oo" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Velleman, David. 1997. <span>“How to Share an Intention.”</span>
<em>Philosophy and Phenomenological Research</em> 57 (1): 29–50.
</div>
<div id="ref-wilson:2016_action" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Wilson, George, Samuel Shpall, and Juan S. Pin̄eros Glasscock. 2016.
<span>“Action.”</span> In <em>The <span>Stanford Encyclopedia</span> of
<span>Philosophy</span></em>, edited by Edward N. Zalta, Winter 2016.
<span>Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University</span>.
</div>
<div id="ref-Wright:1976ls" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Wright, Larry. 1976. <em>Teleological Explanations</em>. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
</div>
</div>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1"><p>Labels include ‘joint action’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="brooks_joint_1981 Sebanz:2006yq Knoblich:2010fk Tollefsen:2005vh pettit:2006_joint Carpenter:2009wq Pacherie:2010fk brownell:2011_early sacheli:2018_evidence meyer:2013_higher-order">(Brooks
1981; Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich 2006; Knoblich, Butterfill, and
Sebanz 2011; Tollefsen 2005; Pettit and Schweikard 2006; Carpenter 2009;
Pacherie 2010; Brownell 2011; Sacheli, Arcangeli, and Paulesu 2018;
Meyer, Wel, and Hunnius 2013)</span>, ‘social action’ <span
class="citation" data-cites="tuomela:1985_weintentions">(Tuomela and
Miller 1985)</span>, ‘collective action’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="Searle:1990em Gilbert:2010fk">(Searle 1990; Gilbert
2010)</span>, ‘joint activity’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="baier:1997_joint">(Baier 1997)</span>, ‘acting together’
<span class="citation" data-cites="tuomela:2000_cooperation">(Tuomela
2000)</span>, ‘shared intentional activity’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1999fr">(Bratman 1997)</span>, ‘plural action’ <span
class="citation" data-cites="Schmid:2008">(Schmid 2008)</span>, ‘joint
agency’ <span class="citation" data-cites="pacherie:2013_lite">(Pacherie
2013)</span>, ‘small scale shared agency’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman 2014)</span>, ‘intentional joint
action’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="blomberg:2015_common">(Blomberg 2016)</span>, ‘collective
intentional behavior’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="ludwig:2016_individual">(Ludwig 2016)</span>, and
‘collective activity’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="longworth:2019_sharing">(Longworth 2019)</span>. We leave
open whether these are all labels for a single phenomenon or whether
different researchers are targeting different things. As we use ‘acting
jointly’, the term applies to everything any of these labels applies
to.<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn2"><p>See <span class="citation"
data-cites="Searle:1990em">Searle (1990)</span>; in his example park
visitors simultaneously run to a shelter, in one case as part of dancing
together and in another case because of a storm. Compare <span
class="citation" data-cites="Pears:1971fk">Pears (1971)</span> who uses
contrast cases to argue that whether something is an ordinary,
individual action depends on its antecedents.<a href="#fnref2"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn3"><p>For views which imply or may motivate dissent, see for
example <span class="citation" data-cites="baier:1997_joint">Baier
(1997)</span>, <span class="citation"
data-cites="chant_unintentional_2007">Chant (2007)</span>, <span
class="citation" data-cites="petersson_collectivity_2007">Petersson
(2007)</span>, and <span class="citation"
data-cites="longworth:2019_sharing">Longworth (2019, 13ff)</span>.<a
href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn4"><p>We propose a way to avoid relying on this assumption in
§<a href="#sec:objection-evidence" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:objection-evidence">7</a> below.<a href="#fnref4"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn5"><p>This strategy has been pursued by a number of
philosophers. One early example (although not the first) is <span
class="citation" data-cites="tuomela:1985_weintentions">Tuomela and
Miller (1985)</span>; it may be that <span class="citation"
data-cites="tuomela_we-intentions_1988">Tuomela and Miller (1988)</span>
and <span class="citation" data-cites="Searle:1990em">Searle
(1990)</span>’s response initiated contemporary debate. This is not to
say that no philosophers have taken an alternative line. <span
class="citation" data-cites="petersson_collectivity_2007">Petersson
(2007, 138)</span>, for instance, attempts to explicate the distinction
between acting jointly and acting in parallel but merely individually
‘in terms of dispositions and causal agency’. See also <span
class="citation" data-cites="chant_unintentional_2007">Chant
(2007)</span> for another alternative line.<a href="#fnref5"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn6"><p><span id="fn:gilbert_mech_committed"
data-label="fn:gilbert_mech_committed"></span> Because Gilbert can be
interpreted as characterising states of an agent in terms of commitments
(compare <span class="citation" data-cites="gilbert:2014_book">Gilbert
(2013, 10)</span>: ‘I take [...] acting together to involve collective
intentions—understood in terms of joint commitment’), she does provide
materials that can be used by a proponent of the standard strategy.
However it may be more accurate to interpret her as offering an
alternative to the standard strategy, one which does not involve
invoking any states of the agents at all but only certain normative
facts (see further §<a href="#sec:objection-evidence"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:objection-evidence">7</a>). Related points could be
made about others cited in this paragraph (particularly <span
class="citation" data-cites="Gold:2007zd">(Gold and Sugden 2007)</span>
and <span class="citation" data-cites="bratman:2014_book">(Bratman
2014)</span>). What unites them is that they do provide materials for
proponents of the standard strategy to identify states of the agents in
distinguishing acting jointly.<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn7"><p>In <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1992mi">Bratman (1992)</span>, the ordinary
individual intentions and other attitudes were offered as jointly
sufficient <span>and individually necessary</span> conditions; the
retreat to sufficient conditions only occurs in <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1999fr">Bratman (1997, 143–44)</span>: ‘for all that
I have said, shared intention might be multiply realizable.’ Because
Bratman distinguishes two tasks in characterising acting
jointly—specifying a functional role and identifying states which
realise it—his work provides materials both for proponents of the
standard strategy and also for proponents of an alternative strategy. We
return to this in §<a href="#sec:objection-evidence"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:objection-evidence">7</a>.<a href="#fnref7"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn8"><p>Examples include <span class="citation"
data-cites="bach:1978_representational">Bach (1978)</span> and <span
class="citation" data-cites="Dretske:1988sq">Dretske (1988)</span>.
Although <span class="citation" data-cites="Bratman:1987xw">Bratman
(1987)</span> is sometimes said to be a proponent of this view <span
class="citation" data-cites="schlosser:2019_agency">(Schlosser
2019)</span>, we take Bratman to be primarily concerned with developing
a theory of intention—and although this involves investigating relations
between intentional action and intentions, it does not obviously require
commitment to characterising the former in terms of the latter.<a
href="#fnref8" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn9"><p>But is this second answer really mechanistically
neutral? According to <span class="citation"
data-cites="alvarez:2016_reasons">Alvarez (2016)</span>, philosophers
sometimes conceive of ‘motivating and explanatory reasons … as mental
states of agents’. Providing a mechanistically neutral characterisation
of intentional action requires a mechanistically neutral
characterisation of reasons, too. If, as we suppose, such a
characterisation exists, then there are mechanistically neutral attempts
to characterise intentional action.<a href="#fnref9"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn10"><p>Of course there are philosophers who might deny that
the second question bears on any philosophical questions about action
(<span class="citation" data-cites="ginet:1990_action">Ginet
(1990)</span>, for example). Proponents of a mechanistically neutral
characterisation are free to oppose such philosophers on the grounds
that the answers to the two questions are mutually constraining (see §<a
href="#sec:objection-evidence" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:objection-evidence">7</a> below). They may therefore
oppose both causal theorists (whose strategy is to answer the first
question by answering the second) and non-causal theorists (who deny
that the second question is relevant).<a href="#fnref10"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn11"><p>Note that the possibility of characterising A in terms
which do not mention B does not in general imply that it is possible for
there to be As without corresponding Bs. Proponents of a mechanistically
neutral approach may therefore accept that intentional actions are
caused by intentions and could not be caused in some other way (to
borrow, with our thanks, some words from a critic).<a href="#fnref11"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn12"><p>This informal contrast between collective and
distributive readings is linked to a debate about the logic of plural
quantification; see <span class="citation"
data-cites="Linnebo:2005ig">Linnebo (2005)</span> for an overview of
that debate.<a href="#fnref12" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn13"><p>As we noted earlier (in §<a
href="#sec:alternative_strategy" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:alternative_strategy">2</a>), the term ‘goal’ has
been used, coherently, both to label states of agents and also to label
those outcomes to which an action is directed. We shall (by stipulation)
use ‘goal’ to label outcomes.<a href="#fnref13" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn14"><p><span class="citation"
data-cites="dickinson:2016_instrumental">Dickinson (2016, 177)</span>
offers a more sophisticated analysis of directedness which is also
neutral on which states are involved.<a href="#fnref14"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn15"><p>Perhaps directedness is better characterised in terms
of an agent’s relation to an outcome (as in <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bennett:1976rg">(Bennett 1976)</span>). We explain below why
we do not offer this as our primary candidate (our position is
neutral).<a href="#fnref15" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn16"><p>This is not entirely uncontroversial, of course. If
<span class="citation" data-cites="baier:1997_joint">Baier (1997)</span>
is right, some cases of acting jointly do not involve collective
goals.<a href="#fnref16" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn17"><p>This point is easily overlooked, perhaps because there
is clearly one type of outcome to which all the agents’ actions are
directed, namely the opening of some newspaper or other. But note that
the onlooker’s action may be entirely successful (she may crack open her
own newspaper) while another agent’s fails (she fumbles and drops hers).
This makes it clear that the outcomes are distinct, although they are of
the same type.<a href="#fnref17" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn18"><p>We have also encountered awkward dissenters on other
influential cases in the literature including Bratman’s going to New
York ‘in the mafia sense’ <span class="citation"
data-cites="Bratman:1992mi">(Bratman 1992, 333)</span> and Blomberg’s
no-common-knowledge cases <span class="citation"
data-cites="blomberg:2015_common">(Blomberg 2016)</span>. The Collective
Goal Account broadly agrees with Bratman on the former (as the victim,
once locked in the trunk, does not perform any action directed to the
goal) and with Blomberg on the latter (as it does not necessarily
require common knowledge).<a href="#fnref18" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn19"><p><span class="citation"
data-cites="blomberg:2015_shared">Blomberg (2015)</span> provides one
means of constructing contrast cases which appear to support such
dissent.<a href="#fnref19" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn20"><p>In saying that a case is ‘reasonably taken to be’ a
paradigm of acting jointly, we mean only that one or more people have
taken it to be one and would continue to do so on reflection. We do not
mean to imply that it is actually a case of acting jointly. And as we
intend the phrase to be understood, a ‘conceivably successful attempt’
need not capture every case that is reasonably taken to be paradigmatic:
what is required is just that there would appear to be insufficient
reason to regard uncaptured cases as actual cases of acting jointly if
the account were true.<a href="#fnref20" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn21"><p>We characterised mechanistically neutral in terms of
acting jointly (in §<a href="#sec:alternative_strategy"
data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:alternative_strategy">2</a>). As Gilbert and Bratman
take the primary explanandum to be cases where two or more agents’
acting jointly is intentional, we are relying on a more general notion
of <em>mechanistically neutral</em> here. We discuss intentional cases
of acting jointly in §<a href="#sec:intentional"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:intentional">8</a>.<a
href="#fnref21" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn22"><p><span class="citation"
data-cites="bratman:2014_book">Bratman (2014, chaps. 4–5)</span> shows
that it is possible in principle to have interpersonal coordination of
planning without joint commitment by constructing possible mechanisms.
But of course the mechanisms (if any) which actually underpin planning
and joint commitment may coincide.<a href="#fnref22"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn23"><p>Things could be more complicated, of course. Multiple
dissociable mechanisms may be associated with joint commitment, and some
but not all of these may coincide with mechanisms underpinning
interpersonal coordination of planning.<a href="#fnref23"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn24"><p>One way of advancing beyond this rough characterisation
is suggested by <span class="citation"
data-cites="laurence:2011_anscombian">Laurence (2011)</span>.<a
href="#fnref24" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn25"><p>Heartfelt thanks to our critical and generous anonymous
referees for the many ways in which their comments have improved this
work and will guide our next steps; and to the editor, whose guidance
materially improved our work.</p>
<p>We have benefitted from discussion with many people while preparing
this work. For extended discussions and their generous support over a
long time we would especially like to thank Olle Blomberg, Chiara
Brozzo, Naomi Eilan, Peter Fossey, Mattia Gallotti, Bart Geurts,
Guenther Knoblich, Hemdat Lerman, Guy Longworth, Judith Martens, John
Michael, Elisabeth Pacherie, Johannes Roessler, Tobias Schlicht, Natalie
Sebanz, Axel Seemann, Thomas Smith, Matthew Soteriou, Anna Strasser,
Hong Yu Wong, and Cordula Vesper. Thank you!</p>
<p>CS was supported by the Department of Philosophy ‘Piero Martinetti’
of the University of Milan with the Project ‘Departments of Excellence
2018-2022’ awarded by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and
Research (MIUR) and by the PRIN 2017 project ‘The cognitive neuroscience
of interpersonal coordination and cooperation: a motor approach in
humans and non-human primates’ (Cod. Prog. 201794KEER).<a
href="#fnref25" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
</ol>
</section>


</div>


