
## Abstract

Research on mindreading has been dominated by questions about the
presence, absence or nature of mindreading concepts or structures, and
by paradigms designed to create the most favourable circumstances for
demonstrating such abilities. This focus on competence has led to a
neglect of questions about performance. Yet without a theory of
performance, mindreading concepts and structures are incapable of
explaining how we ascribe particular thoughts and feelings to other
people, and it is impossible to explain individual differences in
mindreading that are persistent, robust, specific, and consequential for
social abilities. We reconsider the theoretical foundations of
mindreading to develop an account on which competent mindreading
requires generating and selecting mental states that can be recognised
as plausible and appropriate by other people, and so is essentially a
joint social activity. It is an asynchronous joint activity because,
once learned, it can be performed alone. The M-A-J-A (Mindreading as
Asynchronous Joint Activity) account explains how mindreading serves as
a mediator in human social lives, is shaped by social experience, varies
according to that experience, and enables social abilities that would
not be the same without its mediating role. The M-A-J-A account can
explain a swath of existing findings about individual differences in
mindreading that are otherwise puzzling. It provides a framework for
understanding how and why mindreading abilities might vary across the
lifespan, and for developing interpretable and psychometrically robust
measures to study this variation.

Keywords: mentalizing; theory of mind; joint action; individual
differences; psychometric

Forty years after the first empirical paper testing children's false
belief reasoning, research on mindreading is still viewed predominantly
through the lens of early development. This focus on *when* such
abilities first occur has consequences for both theoretical and
empirical enquiry. Developmental theories tend to emphasise basic
structural necessities -- such as concepts of belief, desire, intention
and the like (e.g., Carpendale & Lewis, 2004 ; Doherty & Perner, 2020;
Tomasello, 2018, Wellman, 2014). Empirical studies prioritise paradigms
that are sensitive to the detection of such concepts (e.g., Scott &
Baillargeon, 2017). Of course, researchers have also examined *how*
mindreading develops in ontogeny (e.g. Devine & Lecce, 2021; Gopnik &
Meltzoff, 1997; Hughes, 2011; Tomasello, 2010), phylogeny (e.g.,
Krupenye & Call, 2017; Martin & Santos, 2016), and human history (e.g.,
Heyes, 2019; Moore, 2021), how it varies between individuals and groups
(e.g., Hughes & Devine, 2015; Osterhaus & Bosacki, 2022; Yeung et al.,
2024; Lillard, 1998), and its cognitive (e.g., Apperly, 2010; Ferguson &
Bradford, 2021) and neural basis (e.g., Gilead & Oschner, 2021).
However, the lens of early development means that even this research is
dominated by questions about the presence, absence or nature of
mindreading concepts or structures, and by paradigms designed to create
the most favourable of circumstances for demonstrating such abilities.
This is critically limiting for both theoretical and empirical work.
Theoretically, concepts may be necessary for mindreading, but they are
insufficient because it remains unclear how someone with the necessary
concepts is ever in a position to use them effectively. Empirically, as
we shall review below, there is increasing evidence of individual
differences in mindreading that are persistent, robust, specific, and
consequential, yet we lack theories or tasks that cast light on the
reasons for this variation. After 40 years we still do not know how
people ascribe any specific mental state, nor why some people are better
at this than others. Our contention is that these basic questions are
related and can only be addressed by rethinking, from the foundations
up, ideas about what mindreading is and what makes it possible.

In what follows we first introduce our key ideas in outline form. Next,
we develop the theoretical basis for our contention, beginning from
foundations, and explore its consequences for how mindreading is
conceptualised. In the second half of the paper, we show how our
approach can address large gaps in current understanding of longitudinal
stability in mindreading and individual differences across the lifespan.
We end with a framework for the development of new measures. Such
measures would be a major improvement on current approaches because they
would make transparent what it means for a person to be more or less
good at mindreading.

# Outline

What does it mean to "be in a position" to use mindreading concepts
effectively? This is a question that we will tackle in stages, but let
us start by illustrating the essential problem using by far the most
widely-adopted paradigm for mindreading: false belief tasks. In one
classic form of false belief task (Wimmer & Perner, 1983) Maxi places
his chocolate in the blue cupboard. While he is playing outside his
mother moves it to the green cupboard. Maxi returns, wanting his
chocolate. The critical question is where will he look for his
chocolate? Most people over the age of 4 or 5 years agree that he will
look in the blue cupboard, because that is where he falsely believes his
chocolate is located. But *why* do most people agree? Strictly speaking,
Maxi could reasonably think his chocolate is elsewhere - he might have
prior experience of his mother's preference for storing food in the
green cupboard, he might have a prior agreement with his mother, or he
might have unusual beliefs about the behaviour of physical objects. It
is only the carefully-crafted pragmatic constraints of the story (and
our sensitivity to those constraints) that mean we are in a position to
conceive of only one possible correct answer. Such false belief tasks
are an essential workhorse of empirical research on mindreading, but
they also obscure the fact that the world is not subject to the kinds of
pragmatic constraints that govern storytelling and does not typically
come neatly curated into correct and incorrect alternatives for what
people think or feel. Outside such tightly constrained tasks mindreaders
must take on much more of the work of homing in on plausible mental
states. Understanding how we do this is an essential and overlooked
puzzle about mindreading.

Why are individual differences in mindreading informative for our
purposes? Again, we will tackle this in stages. But let us first
establish the intuition that there really is variation in mindreading
and explain why this might be puzzling. Imagine, for a moment, your
social network of adult friends, colleagues, and acquaintances. If it is
anything like ours then you might perceive substantial variation in
people's social skills. You may also work in an environment that is
highly selective for academic ability. If your work environment is
anything like ours, then you might still perceive substantial variation
in social skills. That is to say, although general cognitive ability may
be relevant for social skills, it is clearly not a sufficient
explanation for their variation. As we will later describe, this
conclusion is also borne out by empirical investigations. The puzzle is
that adults, and indeed children from middle childhood onwards, tend to
pass tests for key mindreading concepts (e.g., Wellman, Fang, &
Peterson, 2011). There are tests of "advanced" mindreading that continue
to pose varying degrees of challenge, and children's earlier performance
on tests of mindreading concepts predict later success with "advanced"
mindreading (e.g., Devine, White, Ensor & Hughes, 2016). However, there
is no theory of "advanced mindreading concepts" to explain what is
challenging about these tasks. Thus, the origin of individual
differences in "advanced" mindreading is a key point of failure for
existing concept-focused theories, and a key challenge for empirical
research is to devise mindreading tasks that do justice to the intuition
that some people appear better at this kind of thing than others.

# Foundations

Giving someone a chef's knife does not make them a chef; it may not even
make them good at cutting. Someone looking to employ a chef would be
pleased to see that they have a chef's knife but would also want to know
that they were able to use it successfully. Research on mindreading has
been dominated by the first half of the job description, that is,
whether the mindreader has the necessary concepts and rules, while
neglecting the second half, that is, whether they can they use them
successfully. We believe that key puzzles in research on mindreading can
be traced to this neglect.

The issue of successfully using mindreading concepts and rules may seem
simple, a minor detail even. Yet comparison with linguistic
communication suggests otherwise. While much can be learned from the
study of words and linguistic rules, multiple additional fields of study
(for example, in phonetics and pragmatics) have proved necessary for
addressing how such elements of language are used for successful
communication. Likewise, understanding mindreading performance may
require fundamentally new ideas. To understand performance, we need an
account of successful mindreading.

It is commonly supposed that when we mindread, success consists in
identifying facts about mental states as accurately as possible. Framed
this way, one starts with an agent whose head is full of beliefs,
desires, and intentions that interact to cause the agent's behaviour.
These mental states cannot be observed directly, and so the mindreader's
job is to infer what they might be from the agent's behaviour. Success
is determined by identifying as accurately as possible which mental
states the agent in fact has. To many readers this will seem so
obviously true that it does not need stating, and although it is seldom
stated this supposition is the foundation for most psychological
research on mindreading. But one does not need to look far for a
contrary view. Dennett's (1988) "intentional stance" theory is widely
cited in empirical research on mindreading. Yet in Dennett's framing
mental states are ascribed as an interpretive gloss over a set of
behaviours with no commitment to their neurocognitive basis. If
behaviour is predicted successfully then the mental state ascriptions
are accurate. The sense in which agents "have" mental states is
fundamentally different in this framing because the facts about mental
states are determined by whether mindreading succeeds or fails (and not
the other way around).

While Dennett focussed on successful prediction of behaviour as the
standard of success for mindreading, others have proposed widening the
standard to include success in attributing responsibility, making sense
of behaviours, and modulating behaviours or 'mindshaping' (e.g.,
Zawidzki, 2013). In what follows we offer a partial defence of these
insights and build on them to offer a refinement: successful mindreading
requires generating and selecting mental states that can be recognised
as plausible and appropriate by other people.

This view of successful mindreading need not be based on taking for
granted Dennett's position. One can also support the view by starting
from an opposing theory on which facts about mental states do determine
whether mindreading is successful, namely Davidson's (1973, 1985, 1990)
extensively developed theory.[^1] Inspired by the success of decision
theory, and specifically by the possibility of treating decision theory
as an elucidation of what preferences are (Jeffrey, 1983),[^2] Davidson
pointed to a set of normative requirements which specify a structure to
which, he claimed, any mindreading target's mental states must conform
(Davidson, 1980, 7, 12).[^3] To illustrate, one requirement is that the
target's beliefs be logically consistent; another is that the target and
the mindreader agree about which observations provide evidential support
for which conclusion. Davidson demonstrated that this structure makes it
possible, in principle at least, to discover a person's mind through
observation and communication.[^4] Davidson's theory also entails a
clear view about what makes for better or worse mindreading. In the same
sense that there are facts about an object's weight or temperature, so
also there are facts about a person's mental states; and better
mindreading is more accurately identifying those mental states.[^5]

But is this view true? Davidson's theory was never supposed to be an
account of how people actually read others' minds (Davidson, 1990),[^6]
but by articulating the requirements-in-principle for accurate
identification of mental states it illuminates some challenges of
mindreading in practice. As we will see (in the section on *Formal
Models*), these challenges also arise for theories which attempt to
describe how people actually read others' minds (e.g., Baker et al,
2017). Attention to the challenges will lead us to a different view
about what makes for better mindreading.

The first challenge is the problem of infinite observations. Davidson's
theory requires observations of 'a potential infinity' of actions to
identify any mental states at all (Davidson 1990, 314). In order to
ascribe to Maxi the belief that the chocolate is in the blue cupboard
the mindreader would need to observe all of the possible consequences of
that belief. Without doing so it is impossible to exclude the potential
infinity of variously similar but non-identical beliefs (e.g., that he
thinks the chocolate is in the blue cupboard every day except
Thursdays). By contrast, practical mindreading involves not merely
finite~~,~~ but often very few observations, as illustrated by even the
simplified case of Maxi discussed above. How can mindreaders coherently
attribute any mental states based on few observations? However they do
this, it will amount to selecting one or another set of background
assumptions to fill in the missing observations imaginatively. Which
background assumptions should be adopted? There are indefinitely many
possible background assumptions which could be used to fill in missing
observations. We have already illustrated this in the case of Maxi: when
asked about his actions or beliefs, many people assume, usually
implicitly, that Maxi shares their beliefs about the ways physical
objects behave, that he has no expectations about his chocolate moving
while absent, and so on. These implicit assumptions fill in for missing
observations. But there are, of course, other assumptions people could
make which would lead them to predict different actions and to attribute
different mental states to Maxi. And these alternative assumptions would
not necessarily be wrong. A group of people might be found to rely on
different implicit assumptions, and there would be no logical or
rational grounds to criticise them. The most we can say is that there is
likely to be an advantage in making roughly the same background
assumptions as other people with whom you might seek agreement,
including Maxi.

This matters for understanding what skilled mindreading performance is.
Having the right concepts and rules is not sufficient. Practical
considerations will be needed in selecting background assumptions to
fill in missing observations. Whether particular background assumptions
are good may depend on a mindreader's aims: what works well for
prediction may work less well when the aim is to assign blame or to
challenge another person's self-understanding. Given the value of
agreement with others on which mental states a person has, whether
particular background assumptions are good may also depend on which
assumptions other mindreaders will make. One consequence is that better
mindreading is not a matter of more accurately identifying mental
states, because objective criteria for accuracy are not in play. Another
consequence is that better mindreaders may be more flexible in shifting
background assumptions between contexts, more willing to consider a
wider range of possible mental states when confidence in background
assumptions is lower, and better at aligning background assumptions with
others. In short, they will be good at generating plausible background
assumptions and at selecting the most appropriate from among them.

One might attempt to respond to this challenge by suggesting that
mindreading need not involve infinite observations at all because it can
be anchored in platitudes (Lewis, 1972). To illustrate, one platitude is
that being told something entails knowing it. If Maxi is told that his
chocolate is in the green cupboard, then we might infer that Maxi knows
his chocolate is in the green cupboard. Such platitudes are surely
useful in mindreading (Heider, 1958), but we will overestimate their
usefulness if we ignore context. Perhaps the speaker has deceptive
motives, or is joking, or simply being sarcastic. Perhaps Maxi does not
hear or correctly process the message. An indefinite range of contextual
factors can render the platitude incorrect. Appeal to platitudes appears
to solve the problem of infinite observations only if we ignore the role
of context in mindreading.

The problem of irrationality is the second challenge we face in applying
Davidson's theory in practical mindreading. Similarly to decision
theory, Davidson's theory applies only on condition that people are
ideally rational (and, perhaps even less plausibly, mostly truthful).
This condition requires not just flawless inferences: Maxi's every
belief, desire and intention must at all times bear in exactly the right
way on his actions.[^7] Failure of this condition would lead to the
conclusion that no humans, nor any other finite animals, have any mental
states at all---and our bounded rationality implies, of course, that
this condition does fail.[^8] A model of how people attribute mental
states must allow that people are rational only within limits. Davidson
suggested that his theory can be saved only by adopting the formal
device that it should apply to parts of people's minds within which the
rationality assumption could hold.[^9] While other strategies are
conceivable (for example, practical mindreaders will simply ignore some
of the things people do), any strategy involves deciding where exactly
to hold on to a rationality assumption. To illustrate, if Maxi's
preferences fail to exhibit transitivity we might select between
different possibilities about which are his 'true' preferences and which
decision reflects a 'mistake'. This selection cannot, of course, be made
on the basis of what is rational. What makes for better or worse
selections will depend on practical considerations like the mindreader's
culture, as there are likely to be advantages in agreeing with others
around us on which mental states someone has. This is a second reason
why we cannot think of better mindreading as simply being more accurate
in identifying mental states. Because there are many ways you could
compensate for irrationality, there are many ascriptions of mental
states which will all count as equally accurate. But in practice, people
around you are unlikely to recognize you as a competent mindreader
unless you agree with them about what Maxi's mental states are, and the
ability to agree with them is what underwrites mindreading's utility,
even when mindreading alone.

To conclude this section, the problems of infinite observations and
irrationality complement each other as one concerns a limit on
mindreaders (they are finite) and the other a limit on the mindreader's
targets (they are imperfectly rational). Both problems motivate
rejecting the otherwise attractively simple idea that better mindreading
is merely a matter of more accurately identifying mental states.[^10]
Instead, we must recognize that using mindreading concepts effectively
involves identifying assumptions that are plausible and selecting those
that are appropriate in a given context. What makes assumptions
plausible and appropriate is not something internal to mindreading but
is a consequence of what seems plausible and appropriate to people, who
of course include both mindreaders and mindreading targets. In this
respect, mindreading is not entirely unlike public gift-giving. Success
requires other people being disposed to recognise that the gift---or
mental state ascription---was appropriate. Ultimately, then, an
individual is successful at mindreading if they ascribe states, predict
behaviours, assign responsibility, and so on in just the way that would
occur if they were involved in a joint mindreading activity with others
around them.

# Developing the theory

As described in the *Outline* section, concepts and rules are unlikely
to be sufficient for mindreading because there may be multiple plausible
responses even in simple cases. For example, even carefully crafted
false belief tasks appear to be a test of whether someone's intuitions,
and their confidence in them, go well beyond anything established by
mental state concepts, general principles for their application, and the
available evidence in this particular situation.

To see the extent of this challenge we need a richer example than
classic false belief tasks, and so we start by developing the problem of
mindreading other people's thoughts and feelings through the example of
gift-giving. Tulip, the head of department, is delighted with the
tickets to the opera that her staff bought for her 50^th^ birthday. When
Bruno, Tulip's secretary, was tasked with organising the gift a few
ideas had sprung to mind, though on reflection some seemed better than
others. Although Tulip isn't known as an opera buff, it felt like the
kind of thing she would like, and her partner confirmed that she didn't
already have tickets. Moreover, it's the kind of thing she would be
happy for everyone to know that she likes. Bruno was confident Tulip
would have liked a wine-tasting class even more, but highlighting her
liking for alcohol felt potentially awkward, especially in an office
where some colleagues do not drink.

This example illustrates that beneath the surface of the everyday
activity of gift-giving lies considerable complexity. Success requires
abductive "best guesses" about potentially appropriate gifts, which take
account of the characteristics of the recipient and their context.
Selection among these possibilities that present themselves involves
consideration of reasonableness, normativity, and reflexive awareness of
others, as well as accommodating particular facts (such as whether the
recipient already has the present). In short, selecting a gift draws
upon a rich web of information, sources of structure, and constraint, it
is essentially relational (involving the giver, the receiver, and
audience), and reaches both forwards and backwards in time to take
account of relevant history and anticipate future consequences. From
everyday experience we might add that it is also something that some
people seem distinctly better at than others.

Our contention is that gift-giving illustrates key challenges inherent
in many instances of mindreading. In common with longstanding views,
mindreading involves the generation and selection of candidate thoughts
or feelings for the target. In contrast with most existing views, it
suggests that the success of mindreading should be judged by the extent
to which it accords with "what people would think" is plausible and
appropriate. It even implies that someone mindreading alone is
nevertheless attempting to reason from the perspective of a group of
people, which is a form of collective reasoning (e.g., Bacharach, 2006;
Chater et al., 2022; Schelling, 1960). In what follows we aim to show
that these insights motivate a new theory, assimilate a wide range of
disparate empirical evidence, and generate productive directions for new
research on how social understanding varies between individuals and
between groups.

**Analogy with modal thinking**

The challenge of generating useful answers from a large and ill-defined
problem space is widely recognised outside of the literature on
mindreading. For example, Phillips et al. (2021) addressed the puzzle of
"what comes to mind" during modal thinking about what is possible, but
potentially not actual. They note that previous literature consistently
"...proposes that we generate the 'alternative possibilities'
fundamental to modal cognition by (i) delimiting a task-relevant
partition within the vast space of conceivable possibilities, (ii)
considering a smaller subset of particular possibilities within the
relevant part of that partition, and then (iii)[^11] ordering or
evaluating them in task-relevant ways to inform our final modal
judgments" (p1027). For example, faced with the task of identifying
something for dinner after a disabling trip to the dentist (e.g., Morris
et al., 2021), people might (i) form a task-relevant partition of
"dishes" (ruling out the much larger set of all inedible things, and
things that are edible but not dishes), (ii) generate a smaller
"consideration set" of possibilities based upon heuristics including
decontextualised value and frequency (iii) select from the consideration
set a dish that avoids elements that are hard or crunchy and therefore
unsuitable after a disabling trip to the dentist. We believe the
challenge of generating and selecting possibilities in modal thinking is
a model for the challenge of generating and selecting mental state
ascriptions in mindreading , but also that mindreading requires
distinctive solutions to these challenges that are enlightening about
how mindreading is possible and why it might vary between people.

## Mapping the analogy to mindreading.

As already noted, it is often assumed that, for someone with the right
concepts and rules, mindreading is a matter of inferring from observed
behaviour what people think, feel and intend, much as you might infer
from texture and rise what is happening inside a loaf. As we noted in
*Foundations,* making such inferences in mindreading would require
choosing which of indefinitely many possible background assumptions to
make and selecting one among many possible ways of repairing
irrationality. The range of possible background assumptions and repair
strategies therefore generates a puzzle: How are we so remarkably good
at having clear intuitions about what someone else is thinking, feeling,
or intending, with high confidence and in agreement with others? Any
adequate account of mindreading must explain how these difficulties are
overcome.[^12] In an analogous way to modal thinking we propose that
having such intuitions depends on (i) "partitioning" with rule-based
constraints, (ii) generating a "consideration set" of plausible
possibilities by narrowing down the possible range of thoughts,
feelings, or intentions another is having, and (iii) selecting the most
appropriate answer from the consideration set.

**(i) Partitioning***.* Mindreading affords many opportunities for using
rules to partition the indefinitely large space of possible mental
states. For example, since *Anna Karenina* was both written and set in
late 19^th^ century Russia, Anna could never have views about such
things as global warming or smartphones, or anything else that was not
known at the time. Equally, Steve Jobs' koumpounophobia provides a
rule-based limit on the space of possible desires that could be ascribed
to him. However, while partitioning in this way clearly reduces the
possibilities, as for modal reasoning, the space of possible answers
will often remain large, leaving a major challenge for steps (ii) and
(iii), which cannot be addressed using rules.

**(ii) A consideration set of plausible possibilities.** Step two in the
model of modal reasoning uses heuristics including decontextualised
value and frequency as a basis for generating a consideration set of
plausible possibilities. These heuristics are unlikely to be helpful for
mindreading because they are insensitive to context and reflect only the
person's individual interests and experiences. What is needed is some
heuristic basis on which "what comes to mind" could be conditional on
context and the collective interests and experiences of people, not
individuals.

To address this, we take inspiration from analysis of related challenges
that arise when people interact for communicating and acting together.
An influential suggestion is that interacting people address these
challenges by aligning their actions, and the mental representations and
neural processes that govern them. For example, during a discourse,
participants make rapid decisions about the linguistic forms they are
hearing and producing, based on perceptual input that only partially
constrains choices. Many accounts suggest that participants solve this
problem through alignment. Over repeated conversational turns, discourse
participants increasingly converge in their phonology, word selection,
syntax, and meaning representations (e.g., Galotti & Frith, 2013;
Pickering & Garrod, 2004). So although on a given turn a speaker might
have used many possible linguistic forms to express their meaning, they
are more likely to repeat ones that have already featured in the
discourse. These alignments simplify the tasks of communicators, by
making the same (aligned) representations more available than logically
possible alternatives.[^13] Importantly, interactive alignment does not
entail mindreading, or other inferential processes, but is thought
instead to depend upon "low-level" priming mechanisms at multiple levels
of processing (e.g., Pickering & Garrod, 2004).

Such alignments have been studied at timescales from milliseconds to
minutes, focussing on temporary alignments between participants in a
discrete interaction that are dispensed with at the end of the
interaction. These are the wrong properties for our purposes. Firstly,
it is unlikely that the alignment that is possible within a single
interaction would be sufficient to bridge the large gap between generic
information from scripts and schemas and the ascription of highly
specific thoughts and feelings. Secondly, temporary interactive
alignment cannot, by definition, support mindreading outside
interactions, yet such mindreading is commonplace. We suggest that these
limitations could be addressed with a relatively modest extension of
theories of interactive alignment. Research on discourse processing
finds that comprehension influences different memory systems over
different timescales, with some effects only operating within the
limited bounds of short-term memory and others drawing upon and
influencing long-term memory (e.g., Rayner, Pollatsek, Ashby & Clifton,
2012). It is only a small step to suppose that alignment, too, develops
beyond specific interactions, creating longer-term, asynchronous
alignment. Such alignment means that in situations where collective
reasoning is relevant, individuals are primed, in a context-sensitive
manner, to think similar things in similar ways.

In sum, Morris et al. (2021) suggest that responses "come to mind" for
modal reasoning according to their frequency and "cached value" derived
from the reasoner's experience. We suggest that responses "come to mind"
for mindreading according to their salience derived from the
mindreader's past interactive alignment. We propose that such
asynchronous alignment is critical for explaining how people are in a
position to generate plausible candidates for what another person might
be thinking or feeling.

### (iii) Selecting an appropriate answer from the consideration set of plausible mental states.

Models of modal reasoning commonly propose that plausible candidate
responses are evaluated according to task-specific constraints (such as
needing to avoid hard or crunchy food) to select a response (Phillips et
al., 2021). For mindreading the example of gift-buying illustrates the
considerations that guide the selection of an appropriate thought or
feeling. These include normative rules about what is morally and
socially appropriate, and whether the ascription seems reasonable in
light of other things we know about what the person thinks, wants and
feels, and other aspects of their situation, time, or circumstances.
Considerations are at least sometimes reflexive, such that what I think
someone else will want should depend, in part, on their knowing that I
or others might find out.

Importantly, such consideration of "appropriateness" is essentially
social. What it means to pick the most appropriate possible mental state
may just be to pick the one to which a group of people -- including the
mindreader and the target of the mental state ascription - might also
agree, given sufficient time to discuss it. This is why an important
determiner of mindreading success will be shared criteria of
appropriateness, shared norms and therefore shared background and
experience with the targets of mindreading and everyone else involved.

## Conclusion: Mindreading is an asynchronous joint activity (M-A-J-A[^14])

We propose that mindreading involves partitioning, generation of
plausible candidate thoughts and feelings for the mindreading target,
and selection of the most appropriate from among this set. Mindreading
is "asynchronous" insofar as the criteria of plausibility and
appropriateness depend upon a background that exists prior to the
current mindreading episode. This is true whether the mindreader is a
participant or a spectator in a current social interaction, or if they
are alone in the dark trying to imagine why their friend has not called,
or whether Tolstoy was consistent in his depiction of Karenin's
indifference to his wife's mental life. Mindreading is nevertheless a
"joint activity" because the criteria of plausibility and
appropriateness are essentially joint criteria. These criteria are not
merely socially learned. Rather, they are constituted by the intuitions
and principles with which groups of mindreaders will tend to agree, and
to which individuals hold themselves in order to be considered rational
and reasonable.

![A diagram of a process AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](img/media/image1.png){style="width:6.27014in;height:6.70486in"}

*Figure 1. Schematic model of the process of generation and selection of
mindreading inferences. (a) Rule-based constraints form a partition of
possible mental states from the field of all available mental states.
(b) Plausible candidates are generated by integrating inputs about the
target and context with background information that has been structured
through interactive social experience. Variation in plausibility is
represented by the height of the blue bars. (c) The most appropriate
candidate(s) is selected by integrating inputs about the target and
context with considerations of normativity, morality, and reasonableness
derived from prior social experience. The selected mental state (red
bar) may not have been the most plausible at step (b). The selections
may become additional inputs to the generation process (d), resulting in
further cycles of generation and selection. This ultimately leads to an
appropriate candidate being selected as the mindreading inference (e).*

# Comparison with other accounts

The present account builds upon a rich history of over forty years of
theories about the nature of mindreading by philosophers and
psychologists. In this section we aim to cast light on the current
proposals by identifying crucial points of similarity and contrast with
existing accounts. The lens of early development has led many accounts
to focus upon the basic structural necessities for mindreading. This
leads them to neglect or underestimate the importance of questions about
*how* we ascribe mental states that are plausible and appropriate, and
severely limits their capacity to explain developmental continuity
beyond early childhood or continuing variation in mindreading in adults.

## ToMM-SP

A longstanding account proposes that a "Theory of Mind Module" generates
possible belief contents while a "Selection Processor" selects between
them (e.g., Leslie, Friedman & German, 2004). We do not endorse this
modular account, but we gladly acknowledge that our proposal that
mindreading involves processes of generation and selection takes
inspiration from this and other work that distinguishes between
generation and selection during reasoning and decision-making (e.g.,
Kahneman, 2003; Morris et al., 2021). However, Leslie et al.'s account
suffers from two essential problems that relate to the challenges
addressed in the present work. First, the ToMM-SP model provides no
explanation for how the Theory of Mind Module generates possible belief
contents. This should not be surprising since a modular architecture is
thought by many to be incompatible with the abductive reasoning required
for mental state ascription (Fodor, 2001). Second, Leslie et al.'s
account provides no explanation for how the Selection Processor decides
which belief to inhibit and which to select (e.g., Apperly, 2010;
Doherty, 2008). Leslie, Friedman, and German (2004) hint at the
challenge when they suggest that "In reaching its decisions, \[the
Selection Processor\] accesses a learned database of circumstances
relevant to selecting between candidate beliefs". However, because their
focus is on the basic structural necessities for mindreading they do not
consider the challenges in understanding how such a database develops or
how it supports such decisions. From the current perspective the ToMM-SP
account addresses much of the challenge of mindreading with a promise
that a solution exists somewhere else.

## Development of structures and concepts

Whereas the ToMM-SP account assumes that the fundamental structures and
concepts for mindreading are innate in a domain-specific module, other
influential accounts propose that these are acquired during early
development. For example, Perner and colleagues emphasise the
acquisition of cognitive structures for metarepresentation (Perner,
1991) or, more recently, for the abstract representation of perspective
(Doherty & Perner, 2020). We acknowledge, of course, that a full account
of mindreading requires a theory of the cognitive structures involved.
However, such structures are empty vehicles for mindreading; necessary
for representing mental states but providing no account of how the
mindreader comes to ascribe any particular mental state to anyone. In a
related programme of work, Wellman and Gopnik (e.g., Gopnik & Wellman,
1992) have led the way in studying children's acquisition of fundamental
mindreading concepts, of perception, knowledge, belief, desire,
intention and the like (e.g., Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Wellman, 2014).
On one reading these concepts play an analogous role to the structures
emphasised by Perner and colleagues, providing the necessary vehicles
for mindreading but no account of their use. On another reading,
concepts are intended to specify the rules for the use of mindreading --
an approach sometimes referred to as "theory-theory" (Gopnik & Wellman,
1992, Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997). However, for reasons described above
they fall far short of achieving that objective and there are reasons to
doubt that they could if they tried. Research on the development of
structures and concepts can complement but cannot replace the idea that
mindreading is an asynchronous joint activity.

## Mindreading as simulation

The essential idea behind simulation accounts is that the mindreader
need not have an exhaustively specified set of rules for mindreading and
can instead use their own mind as a model with which to simulate the
functional processes of the target's mind (e.g., Goldman, 2006; Harris,
1992). For this reason, it has been suggested that simulation might
avoid the problems of intractable processing described above (Heal,
1996). Accounts typically appeal to "relevant similarity" in biology and
experience which ensures that any one brain may serve as the basis for
simulating any other, given appropriately similar starting states.
However, accounts never explain how biology or experience underwrites
the kinds of similarity that are necessary. For this reason, simulation
accounts beg the question which should be at the centre of any account
of mindreading: how is it that anyone is ever in the position to
mindread?[^15]

**Scripts, Schemas and Intuitive Models**

Research in cognitive and social psychology suggests that
representations of events, situations, and people are organised into
scripts, schemas, and stereotypes (e.g., Cantor et al., 1982; Fiske &
Taylor, 1984; Gilbert, 1998; Schank & Abelson, 1977). These ensure that
people in a restaurant (to pick a famous example) will share certain
expectations about seating, ordering, eating etc., enabling
co-ordination between waiters, sommeliers, and diners. Likewise, there
is evidence that people have an intuitive model of the structure of
personality traits (a "mindspace"), the accuracy of which is related to
their success on advanced mindreading tasks (e.g., Conway et al., 2019;
Long et al., 2022). Each of these knowledge structures offers schematic,
generalizable information about a situation, event, or person that
surely helps with forming a consideration set of plausible possibilities
for what someone is thinking. However, this utility is both problematic
and limited. It is problematic because over-reliance on generic
information is likely to be a source of systematic bias in mindreading
(Spaulding, 2018), just as it is in a wide range of other social
judgements (e.g., Fiske, 1993). It is limited because scripts, schemas,
stereotypes, and other intuitive models are insufficient to explain how
we are in a position to go beyond generic information to make flexible,
fine-grained, ad-hoc inferences in a particular instance.

**Mindreading Accuracy**

The challenge of mindreading has often been framed in terms of the
"unobservability" of mental states that are presumed to exist in the
head of the target of mindreading (e.g., Goldman, 2006; Gopnik &
Wellman, 1992; Johnson, 2000; Leslie., 1987; Whiten, 1996). This has
motivated attempts to access the "ground truth" of what mindreading
targets think and feel by asking them to report on these mental states,
and it motivates the idea that the objective of mindreading is accurate
identification of those unobservable mental states (e.g., Long et al.,
2022; Long, Catmur & Bird, 2024). These views face challenges both in
theory and in practice.

The idea that people have privileged and accurate access to their own
thoughts has a long and contentious history (Locke, 1689; Russell, 1917;
Stich, 1983; Boghossian, 1989; Dretske, 1994; Shoemaker, 1994; McGeer,
1996; Moran, 2001; Bar-On, 2004). It may even be that such self-reports
entail the application of interpretive mindreading to oneself (e.g.,
Carruthers, 2011). Therefore, it is far from obvious that self-reported
mental states are a source of ground-truth against which the accuracy of
mindreading can be evaluated. Suppose, however, that self-reported
mental states were a potential source of ground-truth. Even then,
accounts of mental state ascription suggest that accurate identification
of these states by mindreaders is not possible in practice, and so
cannot be a criterion for mindreading success (see *Foundations*).

In practice, a long tradition of research on "empathic accuracy" has
nonetheless assessed mindreaders' accuracy against targets'
self-reports. With origins in research on therapeutic interactions Ickes
and colleagues (e.g., Ickes et al., 1986; Ickes, 1993; Marangoni et al.,
1995) had targets watch a recording of themselves during a clinical
interview or an informal interaction and report post hoc on the thoughts
and feelings they were experiencing. However, this programme of work
finds only limited evidence for stable individual differences in
empathic accuracy when participants attempt to infer those thoughts and
feelings (Ickes et al., 2000). Accurate judgement of emotional valence
depends upon the target themselves demonstrating high emotional
expressivity (Zaki et al., 2008), and empathic accuracy is often
better-explained via relational factors such as whether (and how well)
the target and perceiver are known to each other, rather than the
mindreading abilities of participants (e.g., Zaki et al., 2009).

**Mindshaping**

Zawidzki (2013) claims that the success of human communication and
coordination is founded in the interlocking products of social
experience. Social experience shapes people's minds in ways that make
them mutually interpretable and entitles individuals to reasonable
expectations about others while also making them subject to the same
reasonable expectations themselves. While Zawidzki's (2013) objectives
are not limited to theorising about mindreading[^16] there is a clear
relationship with the present account. Alignment is a two-way process,
and so our proposal that successful mindreading depends on asynchronous
alignment implies that the criteria for successful mindreading serve a
regulatory as well as a descriptive function, providing criteria to
which the target of mindreading should be holding themselves. Consistent
with Zawidzki (2013), according to the M-A-J-A account we not only
mindread others but also expect everyone (including ourselves) to be
held accountable to mindreading interpretations of their own thoughts,
feelings, and behaviour. This shared expectation provides further
foundation for the effectiveness of socially agreed interpretive
principles.

## Formal models of mindreading

There have been recent advances in modelling mindreading using formal
methods. For example, Bayesian models conceptualise intuitive
understanding of behaviour as a "naive utility calculus" according to
which people act rationally to maximise their expected rewards (e.g.,
Baker et al., 2017; Jara-Ettinger et al., 2016). Within a simple
simulated world, such models can predict action given an agent's desires
and beliefs and infer the most likely beliefs and desires from
observation of behaviour. They yield results that accord impressively
well with the judgements of children and adults. However, success for
"Bayesian ToM" models has only been demonstrated for simple scenarios
that maintain tractable reasoning by creating a highly constrained toy
world of possible beliefs and desires, and as noted by Stuhlmuller and
Goodman (2014) *"At the algorithmic level, it seems likely that exact
inference will not scale to models with realistic state spaces."* This
illustrates that the problems of infinite observations and rationality
raised in *Foundations* also arise for these newer formal models.
Clearly these and analogous formal models (e.g., Veissiere et al., 2019)
offer exciting prospects for future advances by specifying the general
reasoning principles over mindreading concepts. Stuhlmuller and Goodman
suggest that there is an outstanding question of understanding how
humans cope with situations that cannot be modelled with an exact
inference algorithm. We believe this is directly aligned with the
M-A-J-A account's objective of understanding how humans make mindreading
inferences that are plausible and appropriate without artificial
constraints on the state space of possible mental states.

## Mindreading is 3rd person and spectatorial

An influential critique proposes that social abilities essentially
involve interaction with others (e.g., Redcay & Schilbach, 2019;
Schilbach et al, 2013). This view paints mindreading as non-interactive,
"third-person", and "spectatorial", and therefore a mis-characterisation
of our social abilities. We suggest that a less polarised perspective
may be useful. We take it as a given that many social abilities do not
require mindreading. Equally, it is clear that mindreading is something
that people do, that it serves valuable functions, and stands in need of
explanation. Moreover, while mindreading surely occurs during
interactions it just as surely occurs outside of them. Therefore, an
account of mindreading cannot depend upon the involvement of the
mindreader in a current interaction with another person. There is
potential for rapprochement, however, because the account developed here
*does* suggest that mindreading is essentially a joint activity, albeit
one where the "joint" aspects are often asynchronous because they are
the products of past interactions and anticipate future social
evaluation.

## Mindreading is socially constructed

The M-A-J-A account has clear affinities with a variety of claims about
the social construction of mindreading. It is also informative to
identify points of divergence. A social constructivist perspective is
prominent in developmental research (e.g., Carpendale & Lewis, 2004;
Fernyhough, 2008; Meins, 2013; Nelson, 1998; Tomasello, 2018), inspired
by theoretical ideas from Vygotsky (1931/1997) and Mead (1934), and
drawing upon evidence that early mindreading is influenced by social
experience with parents and siblings (for meta-analysis see Devine &
Hughes, 2018), and linguistic experience, perhaps especially with
communicative and pragmatic aspects of language (e.g., Astingon & Baird,
2005). Guided by the lens of early development these approaches have
emphasised the social construction of basic mindreading concepts and set
themselves in contrast to nativist accounts (e.g., Leslie et al., 2004)
or constructivist accounts that emphasise individual discovery and
theory-building (e.g., Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Wellman, 2014). However,
our account is agnostic on this question about early development:
mindreading concepts could be innate, individually or socially
constructed, or indeed the emphasis on the acquisition of mindreading
concepts could be misplaced. There still remains the question of how
people put these abilities to practical use, and this is the focus of
our account. This has not typically been a focus of social
constructivist accounts of early development, even if they might
naturally be extended for this purpose.

Beyond the focus on early development, researchers from a range of
disciplines have suggested that mindreading might be influenced or even
constituted by "narrative practice" that is essentially socio-cultural
in nature (e.g., Bruner, 1990; Hutto 2012; Nelson. 1998) and might be
affected by experience with reading character-rich fiction (Zunshine,
2006). Narratives (whether oral or written) are very rich forms,
conveying information about people and situations both directly, and
more indirectly in ways analogous to scripts and schemas. Like
mindreading, storytelling involves turning a potentially infinite space
of possibilities into a finite one. For these general reasons narrative
experience is a plausible contributor to mindreading, and it is
plausible that good storytellers are also good mindreaders. However, a
particularly distinctive idea is that folk psychological narratives
"\...make explicit mention of how mental states ..... figure in the
lives, history, and larger projects of their owners" (Hutto, 2009, p11),
and that exposure to such narratives, and experience with generating
such narratives of one's own, provides the crucial training for
understanding how mental states work together in predictions,
explanations, and justifications of words and deeds. If this idea is
understood in terms of different narrative forms this would suggest that
different forms of folk psychological narrative are relevant inputs for
mindreading but are limited because they deal only in generalities in a
similar way to scripts and schemas. A yet more productive reading of
this idea is that narrative communication may be a critical forum for
learning the soft constraints on how mindreading is used to make sense
of oneself and others, and to test one's own application of those
constraints is aligned with that of the critical arbiters: other people.

## "Two-systems" accounts

Two of us (Apperly & Butterfill, 2009; Butterfill & Apperly, 2013) have
argued that mindreading might be achieved via two types of process that
make complementary trade-offs between flexibility and efficiency, in
common with longstanding proposals in many other areas of cognition. The
account developed here is wholly independent of the success or otherwise
of a two-systems approach to mindreading.

The M-A-J-A accont shares some of the same motivating concerns. Part of
the motivation for a two-systems account is that processing "belief-like
states" that are simpler than beliefs provides a way of avoiding the
potentially intractable processing described earlier, if only for the
limited range of cases where belief-like states will suffice. However,
our two-systems account has not fully addressed the challenge of
explaining how people manage to ascribe full-blown beliefs. To that
extent the present proposals could be viewed as addressing a significant
omission in the two-systems account. Importantly, however, this is also
a significant omission from every alternative theory, meaning that the
present critique and proposals are relevant irrespective of one's
preference among current theories of mindreading.

# Applying the theory to the challenge of understanding individual differences in mindreading

Thus far our account has been motivated by the observation that existing
theories of mindreading fail to explain how mindreading concepts can be
used in practice. We now turn to variability in mindreading. The
motivating intuitions here are that some people are more socially able
than others, that their social abilities may vary between contexts
(e.g., home versus the workplace), and that variation in mindreading has
something to do with this. These intuitions are validated by impressive
advances in measurement of individual differences in mindreading. The
need for new theory is motivated by the surprising failure of existing
theories to explain how such individual differences are possible. We
review core phenomena from recent research and highlight two important
phenomena: longitudinal stability, whereby individual differences in
mindreading in early childhood are stable over time and predict later
social abilities; and the existence of individual differences in
mindreading into adulthood. We then explain why these phenomena are
poorly accounted for by existing theories, before examining how our new
account can help.

## Core methods and phenomena

Measurement of individual differences requires mindreading tasks on
which performance will vary reliably in a given age range. It has been
found that tasks originally devised to test for young children's
possession of mindreading concepts - such as the false belief task - can
be aggregated into batteries that provide reliable measures of
individual differences in young children. Individual differences in
performance on false-belief task batteries are psychometrically robust:
they are explained by a single latent factor (e.g., Hughes, Devine &
Wang, 2018), show test-retest reliability (e.g., Hughes et al., 2000),
and exhibit rank-order stability over time (e.g., Devine & Hughes,
2019). They are consequential in that they predict later social
adjustment (e.g., Lecce & Devine, 2021). Unsurprisingly, since standard
false belief tasks were specifically devised to be sensitive tests of
young children's concept possession, these tasks also demonstrate
ceiling effects beyond age 6. However, the presence of ceiling effects
in false belief task performance (as well as measures of desire
understanding or second-order false belief understanding) do not
necessarily preclude persisting individual differences in mindreading
beyond early childhood. To overcome ceiling effects researchers have
devised mindreading tasks that involve more subtle or complicated uses
of beliefs, desires, and intentions. For example, the Strange Stories
task (White et al., 2008; Happé, 1994) presents children with short
stories and the Silent Film task (Devine et al., 2013) presents children
with short film excerpts, and tests their understanding of the depicted
social scenarios that might involve misunderstandings, lies, and
double-bluffs. The correct answer is an interpretation determined by the
researchers' own judgement, by the majority view of a reference sample
of participants, or some combination of these criteria (Yeung et al.,
2023). Such tasks successfully raise the ceiling for performance and
measure reliable variance into adolescence (Devine, Kovatchev, Grumley
Traynor, Smith & Lee, 2023).

These tasks are not only harder. Numerous studies have demonstrated
clear gains in mindreading performance across middle childhood and
adolescence (e.g., Devine & Hughes, 2013; Dumontheil et al., 2010;
Osterhaus et al., 2016; Meinhardt-Injac et al., 2020). These gains are
difficult to explain in terms of "new mindreading concepts" but
nonetheless appear specifically social because they are not explained by
improved performance in language ability or executive function (e.g.,
Devine & Hughes, 2016; Lecce et al., 2017).

Alongside evidence of continued growth in mindreading performance, there
are marked individual differences in performance even within narrow age
ranges (e.g., Devine et al., 2023). Rank-order stability in mindreading
performance on a given task challenges the idea that individual
differences in performance simply capture temporary differences in
children's mastery of mental concepts or differences arising from task
performance factors (e.g., Hughes & Devine, 2015). Instead, measures
like the false belief task appear to provide an early marker of
persistent individual differences in mindreading, measured within a
narrow window of sensitivity for a given task (Devine, 2021). Moreover,
individual differences in performance exhibit longitudinal stability
over time (e.g., Banerjee et al., 2011; Lecce et al., 2024).
Longitudinal rank-order stability in performance across different
age-appropriate measures (i.e. heterotypic stability) suggests that
different mindreading tasks might tap into individual differences in the
same underlying trait at different points in development (e.g., Devine
et al., 2016).

Individual differences in mindreading are consequential because they are
linked with meaningful social outcomes. For example, over-and-above
language ability, executive function and social motivation, individual
differences in mindreading in middle childhood and adolescence are
associated with superior social skills (e.g., Ronchi et al., 2020;
Devine & Apperly, 2022; Tamnes et al., 2018). Furthermore, in line with
evidence from early childhood about the influence of social experience
on young children's mindreading (e.g., Devine & Hughes, 2018), children
in classrooms where teachers frequently use mental state language
perform better on tests of mindreading than other children (Lecce et
al., 2022). In summary, individual differences in mindreading from early
childhood to adolescence appear to be persistent, robust, specific, and
consequential.

There is evidence that individual differences in mindreading persist
beyond adolescence into adulthood. In a recent systematic review Yeung
et al. (2024) identified 273 studies that used 75 different measures of
mindreading with adults. Yeung et al. also argue that current evidence
falls short of meeting strong criteria for reliable and valid
measurement, in contrast to what has been observed in children. However,
current literature provides reason to be optimistic that meaningful
individual differences in mindreading persist beyond adolescence, and
therefore have the potential to explain persistent individual
differences in social ability.

### Explaining longitudinal stability

No existing account can adequately explain evidence that individual
differences in mindreading are stable over time. Differences in
processing capacity or social motivation have the potential -- in
principle -- to explain why some children may be faster than others to
pass mindreading tasks, and why differences in mindreading are
persistent over time. However, as noted above, processing capacity turns
out to be insufficient to explain why earlier mindreading predicts later
mindreading and social abilities because variation in mindreading
performance predicts social outcomes over and above performance on
measures of executive function and language ability (e.g., Devine et
al., 2016). Regarding social motivation, recent work suggests this, too,
only partially accounts for individual differences in mindreading and
social ability (Devine & Apperly, 2021).

Accounts that focus on the structures and concepts necessary for
mindreading fail to explain longitudinal stability because mindreading
concepts and structures can only ever serve as enablers of social
ability, whereas what is needed is for mindreading to serve as a
mediator. To illustrate, let us suppose that social experience and
social motivation predict mindreading success because they help children
to acquire conceptual grasp of the difference between beliefs, desires,
and intentions, or between such mental states and other things such as
shadows (e.g., Estes, 1988; Wellman & Estes, 1986), or help the
development of representational structures necessary for thinking about
mental states (e.g., Doherty & Perner, 2020; Perner, 1991). This would
*enable* new ways of thinking about mental states. However, concepts and
structures are thought to be universally acquired by late childhood. If
all children acquire the same set of concepts and structures for
mindreading then concepts and structures cannot explain why mindreading
ability continues to vary, or why such variance predicts later social
ability.

In contrast the Mindreading as Asynchronous Joint Activity (M-A-J-A)
account shows how the effective use of mindreading can continue to vary.
This means that it can be a *mediator*, that continues to be affected by
social experience, social motivation, and other influences, and has
unique new influences on social ability. Put simply, the M-A-J-A account
has the right form to explain longitudinal stability in mindreading,
whereas conceptual accounts do not.

**New predictions.**

Providing a viable explanation of longitudinal stability yields new and
distinctive predictions regarding the measurement of early mindreading
abilities. One common practice is to measure early mindreading according
to a "scale" ranging from early-acquired to later-acquired concepts.
This accords well with conceptual accounts, and as demonstrated by
Wellman and colleagues (e.g., Wellman & Liu, 2004; Wellman, Fang &
Peterson, 2011) scales of this kind not only show an age-related
increase in the number of concepts present, but also a reliable order of
emergence, at least within a given culture. A second common practice
measures individual differences on batteries of different instantiations
of the same task - most often false belief tasks -- within a sensitive
age range (e.g., Hughes & Devine, 2015). This accords poorly with
conceptual accounts, which have no basis for interpreting degrees of
performance on tasks designed to operationalise the same concept
(Apperly, 2012), yet as reviewed above, performance on such batteries
shows stable and meaningful variability. Whereas these two measurement
approaches are often used interchangeably, we propose that variation on
such measures should instead be conceptualised on two orthogonal
dimensions (see Figure 2). The vertical dimension corresponds to the
number of mental state concepts that a child appears to understand at a
given point in time. The horizontal dimension corresponds to the number
of contexts (operationalised as the number of tasks) in which a child
can demonstrate appropriate use of a given concept. To the extent that
mindreading is a mediator and not merely an enabler of later abilities a
child's score on the horizontal dimension should be a better predictor
of later mindreading and later social ability, compared with their score
on the vertical dimension.

![](img/media/image2.emf){style="width:6.27014in;height:2.63889in"}

*Figure 2. Visualisation of variation in early mindreading on two
orthogonal dimensions. The vertical dimension corresponds to the number
of concepts currently in a child's repertoire (cf. Wellman & Liu, 2004).
The horizontal dimension corresponds to flexible exercise of a given
concept across different contexts (False belief a-e). For clarity the
latter is illustrated only for the example of false beliefs, but of
course any concept can be tested across multiple contexts, as
illustrated by the range of tasks that target each concept in the
existing literature.*

The M-A-J-A account also yields distinctive new predictions about the
influence of social experience on mindreading by distinguishing between
generation of plausible mental states versus selection of the most
appropriate from among them. The account suggests that children's
exposure to rich social and communicative interactions in which they
become aligned with others will influence their ability to generate
plausible possibilities when required to imagine what someone else is
thinking or feeling (c.f. Ensor & Hughes, 2008; Meins et al., 2003). It
also suggests that children's participation in joint folk psychological
activities - of negotiating how mental states feature in reason-giving
explanations about other people and oneself - will be a particular
influence on their ability to select the most appropriate mental state
from among plausible possibilities.

In summary, the M-A-J-A account has the right form to explain
longitudinal stability, is readily compatible with evidence of social
effects on mindreading over and above cognitive effects and leads to
novel predictions and recommendations for improved methods for future
work.

### Explaining Lifespan individual differences

Since tests of core mindreading concepts are passed during childhood,
adolescents and adults cannot be expected to vary in their possession of
such core concepts. It has been suggested that adolescents and adults
continue to acquire more subtle or sophisticated mindreading concepts,
which may not reach a ceiling of sophistication in all adults (e.g.,
Wellman, 2014). However, no theory describing advanced mindreading
concepts has yet been articulated (e.g., Osterhaus & Bosacki, 2022), and
it is unclear what new concepts are required for success on existing
"advanced" mindreading tasks.[^17] At most such tasks typically involve
the combination or recursion of core concepts (e.g., an intention
thwarted by ignorance; beliefs about beliefs), suggesting that they may
require greater processing capacity but not new concepts. New
mindreading concepts do not seem necessary to explain lifespan
individual differences in mindreading, nor are they likely to be
sufficient.

There is evidence from neuropsychology, dual-task interference, and
brain stimulation suggesting that adults' successful mindreading depends
upon possessing the necessary capacity for working memory and cognitive
control (e.g., Apperly, 2010; Frith & Frith, 2012; Gilead & Oschner,
2021; Happe et al., 2017). However, correlations between mindreading
performance and tests of working memory and cognitive control are
typically modest and are observed inconsistently (e.g., Qureshi et al.,
2019; Ryskin et al., 2015), suggesting that these capacities, while
necessary, are not critically limiting for many adults on many tasks. A
potential exception is highly recursive mindreading, which plausibly
makes considerable demands on working memory. However, recent evidence
suggests that previous work has significantly overestimated adults'
recursive mindreading capacity (Wilson et al., 2023), suggesting that it
is unlikely to be a major source of individual differences. Overall,
this limited role for processing capacity in explaining individual
differences accords with the intuition that general cognitive ability is
relevant but insufficient to explain variation in social ability.

Finally, it seems very plausible that variation in social motivation is
a source of variation in both social ability in general and mindreading
in particular, and there is a small but growing body of evidence
consistent with this possibility (e.g., Contreras-Huerta et al., 2020;
Pomareda, Devine & Apperly, 2024a). However, without an account of how
mindreading can vary in adults, there is no way of explaining how it
could be affected by variation in social motivation.

In sum, despite much work, the current literature has made little
progress beyond the unsatisfactory conclusion that adults who score
higher on tests of mindreading are demonstrating greater mindreading
abilities. The M-A-J-A account addresses this challenge by providing
criteria for judging the quality of mindreading.

## What counts as a "good" mindreading answer?

According to the M-A-J-A account, good mindreading is about agreement
with others around us, including - but not only - the target of
mindreading. To a first approximation a good interpretation is just what
a group of people would jointly conclude given adequate time to discuss
it. Discussion establishes consensus on relevant information about the
target and their situation, airs potential interpretations, and supports
the selection of the best interpretation in light of moral and normative
rules, context, and considerations of "reasonableness". By the end all
discussants should acknowledge the quality of the agreed-upon
interpretation, even if it was not the one they would have reached
independently. It follows that a good mindreader is someone who can
simulate the results of such a group process.[^18] As described earlier,
the M-A-J-A account suggests that such simulation is dependent upon
prior experience of interactive alignment that equips the mindreader
with the intuitions to generate a plausible set of candidate mental
states, and the shared norms and principles used to select an
appropriate mental state from that set.

The first approximation assumes that both the group of mindreaders and
the mindreading target are drawn from a similar population, so that it
is possible to establish consensus on what information is relevant, what
interpretations are plausible, and which is most appropriate. However,
it is clearly possible that differences in knowledge, judgements of
relevance, and what is moral, reasonable, or normatively correct, could
result in groups with different compositions coming to different
agreements, or to those agreements being invalid for the target. It
follows that a mindreader who is flexible enough to simulate the
interpretations of a range of groups and targets will be more successful
than one who cannot. With these conclusions it is possible to address
the challenge of measuring individual differences in mindreading.

## Measurement of individual differences across the lifespan: mindreading interpretations

The M-A-J-A account takes the need for interpretation to be a central
feature of mindreading, rather than an unfortunate bug in existing
attempts to measure it (c.f. Long, Catmur & Bird, 2024). A first step
forward would be for researchers to recognise interpretation as a
potential source of variation. Many existing tests of mindreading in
adults score responses in ways that confound the quality of
participants' responses (i.e. their plausibility and appropriateness)
with the mere quantity of mental states mentioned in the response. Using
a coding scheme that separated these variables Pomareda et al. (2024b)
found independent variation in quality and quantity of mental state
descriptions in participants' mindreading explanations, suggesting that
these are separate constructs with potentially distinctive roles in
predicting social ability.

Second, our analysis highlights the social character of criteria for
determining a good interpretation. This should make researchers think
carefully about whose interpretations are relevant and valid, who gets
to decide which interpretations are better, and whether the answers to
these questions are appropriate for a given research question. Suppose,
for illustration, that some mindreading stories were created and scored
by a straight, white, middle-class, middle-aged, British male academic
(the first author acknowledges these characteristics and also owns a
chef's knife). We contend that these stories and scoring decisions are
unlikely to reflect all the ways in which a broader range of people use
mindreading to understand themselves and others, and that this measure
may turn out to be easier for people who are more like the researcher
than people who are less like him. We suspect that few researchers would
disagree. Yet frustratingly, this remains a contention because there is
remarkably little evidence on variation in mindreading interpretations,
or on the measurement fairness of mindreading tasks across different
populations (e.g., Devine & Hughes, 2013; Hughes, Devine & Wang, 2018).
This reflects the limits of current theories, which do not explain why
these considerations might be important, and it reflects limited use of
standard psychometric considerations, (e.g., about the "fairness" of
measurement between different groups) when designing and analysing
studies of mindreading (Yeung et al., 2023).

What solutions are available? In relation to stimuli, it is feasible to
generate mindreading stimuli, questions, and answers systematically to
reflect the ways that mental states are used in reason-giving
explanations by a broad range of people -- not just "experts" or
"authorities". For example, in ongoing work, we have collaborated with
young adults with diverse demographic characteristics to create
personally meaningful narratives involving social situations that entail
mindreading. The creators, not the researchers, were allowed authority
over the correct mindreading interpretation of their narrative. Such
stimuli have higher face validity than narratives created by an
individual or homogenous group of researchers. They also open the way
for testing whether variation in the way that different people use
mindreading in reason-giving explanations is itself a source of
challenge for mindreaders, whether the ease with which mindreaders
address that challenge varies, and whether this depends on the diversity
of their social experience. This would capture the intuition that a
person may be a capable mindreader when "at home" in a familiar
environment, but less capable in less familiar environments. Moreover,
it suggests that a maximally capable mindreader is one who is able to
adapt their mindreading interpretations to the largest range of
different mindreading targets and social contexts.

In relation to evaluating performance, the M-A-J-A account suggests that
the ultimate criterion should be what the (possibly open-ended) group of
people relevant to the mindreader would agree was a good mindreading
interpretation. This means that there may sometimes be more than one
acceptable mindreading interpretation, that acceptability may vary by
context, and that different groups of people may agree on different
interpretations. Investigating these possibilities Yeung (2024) asked
participants to view scenes involving two protagonists (see Figure 3),
and to choose between the interpretations that participants had given
spontaneously in a prior study. Without additional context participants
showed clear preferences for some interpretations over others, though
more than one interpretation was often favoured for a given scene.
However, these preferences were influenced by additional contextual
information, and by participant characteristics (age of participants in
this instance). On the M-A-J-A account the more frequent responses are
all contenders for being "good" mindreading answers. However, a good
mindreader is one who can accommodate the systematic variation in when
any of these potentially good responses is plausible and appropriate.

![](img/media/image3.emf){style="width:6.27014in;height:3.59097in"}

*Figure 3. Example stimuli and illustrative data from Yeung (2024),
study 5d. Twenty adult participants per condition judged the response
option that best fit the picture. Participants were either given no
further context, or prime sentence intended to bias them towards
response (a) or (b). Data presented here are from a "young" adult sample
aged 18-25. A further study found that these patterns differed in
younger versus older adults (aged 53-60). Whereas younger adults'
spontaneous interpretations were most often consistent with option (a),
older adults' interpretations were more often consistent with option
(c). A person who was sensitive to such variation would be a more
capable mindreader.*

We want to emphasise that there is no single "correct" approach to these
challenges for empirical research. Sometimes it will be appropriate to
crowd-source opinion on the correct answers; sometimes authorial
intention will be valid; sometimes it will be appropriate to ask a
mindreading target what they are thinking or feeling. Design choices
should depend both on theory (i.e., the research question) and on
empirical considerations (i.e., the scoring criteria to capture
individual differences). However, we propose there is potential for
researchers to transform the field by using transparent and
hypothesis-informed decisions to guide selection and interpretation of
existing tasks and creation and scoring of new tasks, and robust
psychometric evaluation of how well the tasks serve their research
objectives.

# Summary and conclusion

To date research on mindreading has failed to address fundamental
questions about how we ascribe thoughts and feelings to other people,
and why some people seem to be better at this than others. The M-A-J-A
account addresses these failures by rethinking what mindreading is and
what makes it possible.

We began by challenging the widespread assumption that successful
mindreading consists of identifying facts about mental states as
accurately as possible. While a target's mental state can be identified
accurately in principle (Davidson, 1973; 1990), accurate identification
of mental states is a wildly unachievable objective in practice.
Instead, part of the art of competent mindreading is generating
plausible assumptions and selecting the most appropriate for a given
context. What is most appropriate will depend, among other things, on
which assumptions others around you would select, and what your aims in
mindreading are. A successful mindreader is one who generates and
selects those assumptions as if they were making their decisions as part
of a group of peers.

How are individuals able to simulate the conclusions of the hypothetical
decision-making of a group? In short, because they are socialised. A
history of interactive alignment leads members of a population to have
similar intuitions about what others might plausibly be thinking or
feeling in a particular situation, and to recognise similar principles
of normativity, appropriateness, and reasonableness. To the extent that
this is true, mindreading is not so much socially constructed as
socially constituted as an ongoing but asynchronous joint activity.

The picture that emerges is one that still features mindreading concepts
and structures as necessary elements that enable mindreading
in-principle. But the practice of mindreading requires the significant
additions that we have described here. Besides giving conceptual
research on mindreading foundations that can bear its weight, we have
shown that our proposals have the capacity to explain extensive
empirical phenomena that are currently puzzling and provide a framework
for new empirical approaches to studying mindreading beyond the early
developmental period that has been the dominant focus for the past 40
years.

**References**

Abell, F., Happe, F., & Frith, U. (2000). Do triangles play tricks?
Attribution of mental states to animated shapes in normal and abnormal
development. *Cognitive Development*, *15*(1), 1-16.

[Allais, M. (1979). The So-Called Allais Paradox and Rational Decisions
under Uncertainty. In M. Allais & O. Hagen (Eds.),]{.mark} *Expected
Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox: Contemporary Discussions of
the Decisions under Uncertainty with Allais' Rejoinder* [(pp. 437--681).
Dordrecht: Springer.]{.mark}

Apperly, I.A. (2010). *Mindreaders: the cognitive basis of "theory of
mind".* Hove: Psychology Press / Taylor & Francis Group.

Apperly, I.A. (2012). What is "theory of mind"? Concepts, cognitive
processes and individual differences. *Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 65(5),* 825-839.

Apperly, I.A. & Butterfill, S.A, (2009). Do humans have two systems to
track beliefs and belief-like states? *Psychological Review, 116(4),
953-970.*

*Apperly, I.A. & Wang, J.J. (2021). The Cognitive Basis of Social
Interaction in adulthood. In Ferguson, H.J., Brunsdon, V. & Bradford, E.
(Eds.) The Cognitive Basis of Social Interaction Across the Lifespan.
OUP.*

Astington, J. W., & Baird, J. A. (Eds.). (2005). *Why language matters
for theory of mind*. Oxford University Press.

Aviezer, H., Trope, Y., & Todorov, A. (2012). Holistic person
processing: faces with bodies tell the whole story. *Journal of
personality and social psychology*, *103*(1), 20.

Bacharach, M. (2006). *Beyond individual choice*. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Latham, P. E., Roepstorff, A., Rees, G., &
Frith, CD. (2010). Optimally interacting minds. *Science, 329,*
1081--1085.

Baker, C. L., Jara-Ettinger, J., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2017).
Rational quantitative attribution of beliefs, desires and percepts in
human mentalizing. *Nature Human Behaviour*, *1*(4), 0064.

Banerjee, R., Watling, D., & Caputi, M. (2011). Peer relations and the
understanding of faux pas: Longitudinal evidence for bidirectional
associations. *Child development*, *82*(6), 1887-1905.

Bar-On, D. (2004). *Speaking My Mind: Expression and Self-Knowledge*.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Barrett, H. C. (2020). Towards a cognitive science of the human:
Cross-cultural approaches and their urgency. *Trends in cognitive
sciences*, *24*(8), 620-638.

Boghossian, P. (1989). Content and Self-Knowledge. *Philosophical
Topics*, 17(1): 5--26.

Bruner, J. (1990). *Acts of meaning* (Vol. 3). Harvard university press.

Butterfill, S. & Apperly I.A. (2013). How to construct a minimal theory
of mind. *Mind & Language, 28(2)* 606-637*.*

Callaghan, T., Rochat, P., Lillard, A., Claux, M. L., Odden, H.,
Itakura, S., \... & Singh, S. (2005). Synchrony in the onset of
mental-state reasoning: Evidence from five cultures. *Psychological
Science*, *16*(5), 378-384.

Cantor, N., Mischel, W., & Schwartz, J. C. (1982). A prototype analysis
of psychological situations. Cognitive Psychology, 14, 45-77.

Carpendale, J. I., & Lewis, C. (2004). Constructing an understanding of
mind: The development of children\'s social understanding within social
interaction. *Behavioral and brain sciences*, *27*(1), 79-96.

Carruthers, P. (2011). *The opacity of mind: An integrative theory of
self-knowledge*. OUP Oxford.

Chater, N., Zeitoun., H., & Melkonyan, T. (2022). The paradox of social
interaction: shared intentionality, we-reasoning, and virtual
bargaining. *Psychological Review, 129(3),* 415--437.

Contreras-Huerta, L. S., Pisauro, M. A., & Apps, M. A. (2020). Effort
shapes social cognition and behaviour: A neuro-cognitive framework.
*Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews*, *118*, 426-439.

Conway, J. R., Catmur, C., & Bird, G. (2019). Understanding individual
differences in theory of mind via representation of minds, not mental
states. *Psychonomic bulletin & review*, *26*, 798-812.

[Davidson, D. (1973). Radical interpretation. In]{.mark} *Inquiries into
truth and interpretation* [(pp. 125--139). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.]{.mark}

Davidson, D. (1974). Belief and the basis of meaning. In *Inquiries into
truth and interpretation* (pp. 141--154). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Davidson, D. (1980). Toward a unified theory of meaning and action.
*Grazer Philosophische Studien*, *11*, 1--12.

Davidson, D. (1985). A new basis for decision theory. *Theory and
Decision*, *18*, 87--98.

Davidson, D. (1990). The structure and content of truth. *The Journal of
Philosophy*, *87*(6), 279--328.

Davidson, D. (1995). Could there be a science of rationality?
*International Journal of Philosophical Studies*, *3*(1), 1--16.

Davidson, D. (2004). *Problems of rationality*. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

[Devine, R.T. (2021). Individual differences in theory of mind in middle
childhood and adolescence. In Devine, R.T. & Lecce, S. (2021) (Eds).
*Theory of Mind in Middle Childhood and Adolescence: Integrating
Multiple Perspectives* (pp 55-76). Routledge.]{.mark}

Devine, R.T. & Apperly, I.A. (2022) Willing and Able? Theory of Mind,
Social Motivation and Social Competence in Middle Childhood and Early
Adolescence. *Developmental Science.* *25 (1), e13137.*

Devine, R. T., & Hughes, C. (2013). Silent films and strange stories:
Theory of mind, gender, and social experiences in middle childhood.
*Child development*, *84*(3), 989-1003.

[Hughes, C., & Devine, R. T. (2015). Individual differences in theory of
mind from preschool to adolescence: Achievements and directions.]{.mark}
*Child development perspectives*[,]{.mark} *9*[(3), 149-153.]{.mark}

Devine, R. T., & Hughes, C. (2016). Measuring theory of mind across
middle childhood: Reliability and validity of the silent films and
strange stories tasks. *Journal of experimental child psychology*,
*149*, 23-40.

Devine, R. T., & Hughes, C. (2018). Family correlates of false belief
understanding in early childhood: A meta‐analysis. *Child development*,
*89*(3), 971-987.

Devine, R. T., & Hughes, C. (2019). Let\'s talk: Parents' mental talk
(not mind‐mindedness or mindreading capacity) predicts children\'s false
belief understanding. *Child Development*, *90*(4), 1236-1253.

Devine, R. T., Kovatchev, V., Grumley Traynor, I., Smith, P., & Lee, M.
(2023). Machine learning and deep learning systems for automated
measurement of "advanced" theory of mind: Reliability and validity in
children and adolescents. *Psychological Assessment*, *35*(2), 165.

Devine, R. T., & Lecce, S. (Eds.). (2021). *Theory of mind in middle
childhood and adolescence: Integrating multiple perspectives*.
Routledge.

Devine, R. T., White, N., Ensor, R., & Hughes, C. (2016). Theory of mind
in middle childhood: Longitudinal associations with executive function
and social competence. *Developmental psychology*, *52*(5), 758.

Dennett, D. C. (1988). Précis of the intentional stance. *Behavioral and
brain sciences*, *11*(3), 495-505.

Doherty, M. J., & Perner, J. (2020). Mental files: Developmental
integration of dual naming and theory of mind. *Developmental Review*,
*56*, 100909.

Dixson, H. G., Komugabe‐Dixson, A. F., Dixson, B. J., & Low, J. (2018).
Scaling theory of mind in a small‐scale society: A case study from
Vanuatu. *Child Development*, *89*(6), 2157-2175.

Doherty, M. (2008). *Theory of mind: How children understand others\'
thoughts and feelings*. psychology press.

Dretske, F. (1994). "Introspection", *Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society*. 94(1), 263--278.

Dumontheil, I., Apperly, I. A., & Blakemore, S. J. (2010). Online usage
of theory of mind continues to develop in late adolescence.
*Developmental Science*, *13*(2), 331-338.

Dziobek, I., Fleck, S., Kalbe, E., Rogers, K., Hassenstab, J., Brand,
M., \... & Convit, A. (2006). Introducing MASC: a movie for the
assessment of social cognition. *Journal of autism and developmental
disorders*, *36*, 623-636.

Estes, D., Wellman, H. M., & Woolley, J. D. (1989). Children\'s
understanding of mental phenomena. In *Advances in Child Development and
Behavior* (Vol. 22, pp. 41-87).

Ferguson, H. J., & Bradford, E. E. (Eds.). (2021). *The cognitive basis
of social interaction across the lifespan*. Oxford University Press.

Fernyhough, C. (2008). Getting Vygotskian about theory of mind:
Mediation, dialogue, and the development of social understanding.
*Developmental Review*, *28*(2), 225-262.

Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1984). Social cognition. New York: Random
House.

Fiske, S. T. (1993). Social cognition and social perception. *Annual
review of psychology, 44(1),* 155-194.

Fodor, J. A. (2001). *The mind doesn\'t work that way: The scope and
limits of computational psychology*. MIT press.

Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (2012). Mechanisms of social cognition.
*Annual review of psychology*, *63*, 287-313.

Gallotti, M., & Frith, C. D. (2013). Social cognition in the we-mode.
*Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, *17*(4), 160-165.

Gilbert, D. T. (1998). Ordinary personology. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T.,
Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (4th ed.,
pp. 8-150). New York: McGraw Hill.

Gilead, M., & Ochsner, K. N. (Eds.). (2021). *The neural basis of
mentalizing*. New York: Springer International Publishing.

Goldman, A. I. (2006). *Simulating minds: The philosophy, psychology,
and neuroscience of mindreading*. Oxford University Press.

[Gönültaş, S., Selçuk, B., Slaughter, V., Hunter, J. A., & Ruffman, T.
(2020). The capricious nature of theory of mind: Does mental state
understanding depend on the characteristics of the target?.]{.mark}
*Child Development*[,]{.mark} *91*[(2), e280-e298.]{.mark}

Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). *Words, thoughts, and theories*.
Mit Press.

Gopnik, A., & Wellman, A. N. (1992). Why the child's theory of mind
really *is* a theory. *Mind & Language, 7(1&2),* 145-171.

Happé, F., Cook, J. L., & Bird, G. (2017). The structure of social
cognition: In (ter) dependence of sociocognitive processes. *Annual
review of psychology*, *68*, 243-267.

Harris, P. L. (1992). From simulation to folk psychology: the case for
development. *Mind & Language*.

Heal, J. (1996). Simulation, theory, and content. In Carruthers, P., &
Smith, P. K. (Eds.). *Theories of theories of mind*. Cambridge
university press. 75-89.

Heider, F. (1958). *The psychology of interpersonal relations.*
Hillsdale, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Heyes, C. (2019). Précis of cognitive gadgets: The cultural evolution of
thinking. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, *42*, e169.

Hughes, C. (2011). *Social understanding and social lives: From
toddlerhood through to the transition to school*. Psychology Press.

Hughes, C., Adlam, A., Happé, F., Jackson, J., Taylor, A., & Caspi, A.
(2000). Good test‐retest reliability for standard and advanced
false‐belief tasks across a wide range of abilities. *Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry*, *41*(4), 483-490.

Hughes, C., & Devine, R. T. (2015). Individual differences in theory of
mind from preschool to adolescence: Achievements and directions. *Child
development perspectives*, *9*(3), 149-153.

Hughes, C., Devine, R. T., & Wang, Z. (2018). Does parental
mind‐mindedness account for cross‐cultural differences in preschoolers'
theory of mind?. *Child development*, *89*(4), 1296-1310.

[Ensor, R., & Hughes, C. (2008). Content or connectedness? Mother--child
talk and early social understanding.]{.mark} *Child
development*[,]{.mark} *79*[(1), 201-216.]{.mark}

Hutto, D. (2009). Folk psychology as narrative practice. *Journal of
Consciousness Studies*, *16*(6-7), 9-39.

Hutto, D. D. (2012). *Folk psychological narratives: The sociocultural
basis of understanding reasons*. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

[Jeffrey, R. C. (1983).]{.mark} *The logic of decision, second
edition*[. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.]{.mark}

*Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping
bounded rationality. American Psychologist, 58(9), 697--720.*

Ickes, W. (1993). Empathic accuracy. *Journal of personality*, *61*(4),
587-610.

Ickes, W., Robertson, E., Tooke, W., & Teng, G. (1986). Naturalistic
social cognition: Methodology, assessment, and validation. *Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology*, *51*(1), 66.

Ickes, W., Buysse, A. N. N., Pham, H. A. O., Rivers, K., Erickson, J.
R., Hancock, M., \... & Gesn, P. R. (2000). On the difficulty of
distinguishing "good" and "poor" perceivers: A social relations analysis
of empathic accuracy data. *Personal Relationships*, *7*(2), 219-234.

Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Schulz, L. E., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2016).
The naïve utility calculus: Computational principles underlying
commonsense psychology. *Trends in cognitive sciences*, *20*(8),
589-604.

Jeffrey, R. C. (1983). *The Logic of Decision, Second Edition*. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Johnson, S. (2000). The recognition of mentalistic agents in infancy.
*Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, *4*, 22--28.

Krupenye, C., & Call, J. (2019). Theory of mind in animals: Current and
future directions. *Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science*,
*10*(6), e1503.

Lecce, S., Bianco, F., Devine, R. T., & Hughes, C. (2017). Relations
between theory of mind and executive function in middle childhood: A
short-term longitudinal study. *Journal of experimental child
psychology*, *163*, 69-86.

Lecce, S., & Devine, R. T. (2021). Social interaction in early and
middle childhood. *The cognitive basis of social interaction across the
lifespan*, 47-69.

Lecce, S., Ronchi, L., & Devine, R. T. (2022). Mind what teacher says:
Teachers' propensity for mental‐state language and children\'s theory of
mind in middle childhood. *Social Development*, *31*(2), 303-318.

Lecce, S., Ronchi, L., & Devine, R. T. (2024). The Effect of Peers'
Theory of Mind on Children's Own Theory of Mind development: A
Longitudinal Study in Middle Childhood and Early Adolescence.
*Developmental Psychology*.

Leslie, A. M. (1987). Pretense and representation: The origins of\"
theory of mind.\". *Psychological review*, *94*(4), 412.

Leslie, A. M., Friedman, O., & German, T. P. (2004). Core mechanisms in
'theory of mind'. *Trends in cognitive sciences*, *8*(12), 528-533.

Lewis, D. K. (1972). Psychophysical and theoretical identifications.
Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 50(3), 249--258.

Lillard, A. (1998). Ethnopsychologies: cultural variations in theories
of mind. *Psychological bulletin*, *123*(1), 3.

Locke, J. (1689/1975) *An Essay Concerning Human Understanding*. P.H.
Nidditch (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Long, E. L., Cuve, H. C., Conway, J. R., Catmur, C., & Bird, G. (2022).
Novel theory of mind task demonstrates representation of minds in mental
state inference. *Scientific reports*, *12*(1), 21133.

Long, E. L., Catmur, C., & Bird, G. (2024). The Theory of Mind
hypothesis of autism: A critical evaluation of the
status-quo. *Psychological Review*.

Marangoni, C., Garcia, S., Ickes, W., & Teng, G. (1995). Empathic
accuracy in a clinically relevant setting. *Journal of personality and
social psychology*, *68*(5), 854.

Martin, A., & Santos, L. R. (2016). What cognitive representations
support primate theory of mind?. *Trends in cognitive sciences*,
*20*(5), 375-382.

McGeer, V. (1996). "Is 'Self-Knowledge' an Empirical Problem?
Renegotiating the Space of Philosophical Explanation". *Journal of
Philosophy*, 93(10): 483--515.

[McLoughlin, N., & Over, H. (2017). Young children are more likely to
spontaneously attribute mental states to members of their own
group.]{.mark} *Psychological Science*[,]{.mark} *28*[(10),
1503-1509.]{.mark}

McNeill, W. E. S. (2012). On Seeing That Someone Is Angry. *European
Journal of Philosophy* 20(4), 575--97.

Mead, G. H. (1934)*. Mind, self and society from the standpoint of a
social behaviorist. University of Chicago Press.*

Meinhardt‐Injac, B., Daum, M. M., & Meinhardt, G. (2020). Theory of mind
development from adolescence to adulthood: Testing the two‐component
model. *British Journal of Developmental Psychology*, *38*(2), 289-303.

Meins, E. (2013). *Security of attachment and the social development of
cognition*. Psychology press.

[Meins, E., Fernyhough, C., Wainwright, R., Clark‐Carter, D., Das Gupta,
M., Fradley, E., & Tuckey, M. (2003). Pathways to understanding mind:
Construct validity and predictive validity of maternal
mind‐mindedness.]{.mark} *Child development*[,]{.mark} *74*[(4),
1194-1211.]{.mark}

Moore, R. (2021). The cultural evolution of mind-modelling. *Synthese*,
*199*(1), 1751-1776.

Moran, R. (2001). *Authority and Estrangement: An Essay on
Self-Knowledge*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Morris, A., Phillips, J., Huang, K., & Cushman, F. (2021). Generating
options and choosing between them depend on distinct forms of value
representation. *Psychological science*, *32*(11), 1731-1746.

Nelson, K. (1998). *Language in cognitive development: The emergence of
the mediated mind*. Cambridge University Press.

Osterhaus, C., Koerber, S., & Sodian, B. (2016). Scaling of advanced
theory‐of‐mind tasks. *Child development*, *87*(6), 1971-1991.

Osterhaus, C., & Bosacki, S. L. (2022). Looking for the lighthouse: A
systematic review of advanced theory-of-mind tests beyond preschool.
*Developmental Review*, *64*, 101021.

[Perez-Zapata, D., Slaughter, V., & Henry, J. D. (2016). Cultural
effects on mindreading.]{.mark} *Cognition*[,]{.mark} *146*[,
410-414.]{.mark}

Perner, J. (1991). *Understanding the representational mind*. The MIT
Press.

Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic psychology
of dialogue. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, *27*(2), 169-190.Scott, R.
M., & Baillargeon, R. (2017). Early false-belief understanding. *Trends
in cognitive sciences*, *21*(4), 237-249.

Pomareda, C., Devine, R. T., & Apperly, I. A. (2024a). Social
Motivation, Over and Above Mindreading, is Associated With Social
Support, Autistic Traits, and Depressive Symptoms in Adults. *Manuscript
submitted for publication.*

Pomareda, C., Devine, R. T., & Apperly, I. A. (2024b). Mindreading
quality versus quantity: A theoretically and empirically motivated
two-factor structure for individual differences in adults'
mindreading. *Plos one*, *19*(6), e0305270.

Qureshi, A.W., Monk, R.L., Samson, D. & Apperly, I.A. (2020) Does
interference between self and other perspectives in Theory of Mind Tasks
reflect a common underlying process? Evidence from individual
differences in theory of mind and inhibitory control. *Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 27(1),* 178-190*.*

Redcay, E., & Schilbach, L. (2019). Using second-person neuroscience to
elucidate the mechanisms of social interaction. *Nature Reviews
Neuroscience*, *20*(8), 495-505.

Ronchi, L., Banerjee, R., & Lecce, S. (2020). Theory of mind and peer
relationships: The role of social anxiety. *Social Development*,
*29*(2), 478-493.

Russell, B. (1917). Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by
Description. In *Mysticism and Logic*, London: George Allen and Unwin.

Ryskin, R. A., Benjamin, A. S., Tullis, J., & Brown-Schmidt, S. (2015).
Perspective-taking in comprehension, production, and memory: An
individual differences approach. *Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General*, *144*(5), 898.

Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977/2013). *Scripts, plans, goals, and
understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge structures*. Psychology
Press.

Schelling, T. (1960). *The strategy of conflict.* Harvard University
Press. 

Schilbach, L., Timmermans, B., Reddy, V., Costall, A., Bente, G.,
Schlicht, T., & Vogeley, K. (2013). Toward a second-person
neuroscience 1. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, *36*(4), 393-414.

Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint action: bodies
and minds moving together. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, *10*(2),
70-76.

[Selcuk, B., Gonultas, S., & Ekerim‐Akbulut, M. (2023). Development and
use of theory of mind in social and cultural context.]{.mark} *Child
Development Perspectives*[,]{.mark} *17*[(1), 39-45.]{.mark}

Shoemaker, S. (1994). Self-Knowledge and 'Inner Sense'. *Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research*, 54(2): 249--314.

Smith, J. (2010). Seeing Other People. *Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research* 81(3), 731--48.

Spaulding, S. (2018). *How we understand others: Philosophy and social
cognition*. Routledge.

Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1987). Precis of relevance: Communication and
cognition. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, *10*(4), 697-710.

Stich, S. (1983). *From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science*.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Stuhlmüller, A., & Goodman, N. D. (2014). Reasoning about reasoning by
nested conditioning: Modelling theory of mind with probabilistic
programs. *Cognitive Systems Research*, *28*, 80-99.

[Tomasello, M. (2010).]{.mark} *Origins of human communication*[. MIT
press.]{.mark}

Tomasello, M. (2018). How children come to understand false beliefs: A
shared intentionality account. *Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences*, *115*(34), 8491-8498.

Veissière, S. P., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., &
Kirmayer, L. J. (2020). Thinking through other minds: A variational
approach to cognition and culture. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*,
*43*, e90.

Wellman, H. M. (2014). *Making minds: How theory of mind develops*.
Oxford University Press.

Wellman, H. M., & Estes, D. (1986). Early understanding of mental
entities: A re-examination of childhood realism. *Child development*,
910-923.

Wellman, H. M., Fang, F., & Peterson, C. C. (2011). Sequential
progressions in a theory‐of‐mind scale: Longitudinal perspectives.
*Child development*, *82*(3), 780-792.

Whiten, A. (1996). When does smart behaviour-reading become
mind-reading? In P. Carruthers & P. K. Smith (Eds.), *Theories of
Theories of Mind* (pp. 277--292). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wilson, R., Perez, D. Hruby, A., van der Kleij, S. W. & Apperly I.A.
(2023) Is Recursive "Mindreading" Really an Exception to Limitations on
Recursive Thinking?. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
152*(5), 1454--1468

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation
and constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children\'s
understanding of deception. *Cognition*, *13*(1), 103-128.

Vygotsky, L. S. (1997). Genesis of higher mental functions. In R. W.
Rieber (Ed.). *The collected works of L. S. Vygotsky (Vol. 4)*. New
York: Plenum (Original work published 1931).

Yeung, E. K. L. (2024) Unpublished doctoral thesis. University of
Birmingham, UK.

Yeung, E. K. L., Apperly, I. A., & Devine, R. T. (2023). Measures of
individual differences in adult theory of mind: A systematic review.
*Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,* 105481.

Zaki, J., Bolger, N., & Ochsner, K. (2008). It takes two: The
interpersonal nature of empathic accuracy. *Psychological science,
19(4),* 399-404.

Zaki, J., Bolger, N., & Ochsner, K. (2009). Unpacking the informational
bases of empathic accuracy. *Emotion, 9(4),* 478.

[Zawidzki, T. W. (2013).]{.mark} *Mindshaping: A new framework for
understanding human social cognition*[. MIT Press.]{.mark}

Zunshine, L. (2006). *Why we read fiction: Theory of mind and the
novel.* Ohio State University Press.

[^1]: The theory's development is presented in a series of papers
    starting with Davidson (1973). The most detailed statement is
    Davidson (1990).

[^2]: Davidson (1990, 297); Davidson (1985).

[^3]: 'if we are to derive meaning and belief from evidence concerning
    what causes someone to hold sentences true, it can only be ...
    because we stipulate a structure.' (Davidson, 1980, 7)

[^4]: 'What makes the task \[of interpretation\] practicable at all is
    the structure that the normative character of thought, desire,
    speech, and action imposes on correct attributions of attitudes to
    others, and hence on interpretation of their speech and explanations
    of their actions.' (Davidson, 1990, 325; Davidson, 1980, 8)

[^5]: There is occasionally confusion on this point because Davidson
    famously allows that there is indeterminacy concerning what someone
    thinks. Specifically, he rejects the view that 'each belief has a
    definite object' (Davidson, 1974, 154). But indeterminacy is
    consistent with there being facts about people's mental states. As
    Davidson argues, '\[t\]he consequent indeterminacy of interpretation
    is not \[...\] any more significant or troublesome than the fact
    that weight may be measured in grams or in ounces' (Davidson, 1980,
    6).

[^6]: ​​'All we should require of a theory of truth for a speaker is that
    it be such that, if an interpreter had explicit propositional
    knowledge of the theory, he would know the truth conditions of
    utterances of the speaker.' (Davidson, 1990, 312)

[^7]: You cannot say that Maxi's mental states violate the theory's
    axioms: because the theory aims to be an elucidation of what mental
    states are, if he fails to conform to the axioms there is---so the
    theory---simply no way of making sense of the idea that he has
    mental states at all.

[^8]: Researchers occasionally respond to a related issue in decision
    theory by rejecting the idea that decision theory specifies what
    preferences and subjective expectations are. On such a view, those
    things exist independently of the theory (e.g. Allais, 1979, 548).
    This amounts to rejecting one application of decision theory
    (namely, that of characterising preferences and the rest) while
    endorsing other applications of it. We agree, of course, that the
    bounds of rationality are a major obstacle to interpreting decision
    theory as specifying what preferences and subjective expectations
    are. The problem is to provide an alternative to decision theory (or
    to Davidson's theory) which can ensure all researchers have a shared
    understanding of these states. As far as we are aware, this
    challenge is yet to be met.

[^9]: Compare Davidson (2004, 181): 'if we are going to explain
    irrationality at all, it seems we must assume that the mind can be
    partitioned into quasi-independent structures that interact in ways
    the Plato Principle \[according to which there is no internal
    irrationality\] cannot accept or explain.'

[^10]: Of course this brief discussion does not exclude other possible
    responses to the problems. We also acknowledge that there are
    entirely different views about the conceptual foundations of
    mindreading---for instance, some philosophers have held that mental
    states can be perceived (Smith, 2010; McNeill, 2012), which would
    motivate a different view. What we have shown here is just that the
    most influential, best developed theory motivates our conclusions
    about what it is to be in a position to use mindreading concepts
    effectively.

[^11]: The original text was numbered "ii" but context indicates this
    must have been a typographical error

[^12]: These concerns are a particular instance of a widely-recognised
    set of challenges about identifying what is relevant in problem
    spaces that are very large or only imprecisely specified (e.g.,
    Fodor 2001; Sperber & Wilson, 1987). We are not proposing a solution
    to these challenges, which are sometimes thought to be intractable.
    We are proposing that progress can be made by recognising the
    existence of these challenges, recognising their particular
    character in relation to mindreading, and using this analysis to
    make tractable predictions and interpretations of empirical
    phenomena.

[^13]: Analogous alignment phenomena occur in non-verbal interaction and
    coordination (e.g., Brahimi et al., 2010; Sebanz et al., 2006).

[^14]: Informal feedback indicated that some readers may perceive
    similarity to a widely-recognised political acronym. For the
    avoidance of doubt, M-A-J-A is pronounced in the same way as the
    word "major", following the sounds of the words that it denotes.

[^15]: Simulation is often thought to play a role in interactive
    alignment. For example, Garrod and Pickering (2004) suggest that
    "forward models" generated by one's own processes for speech
    production also serve a predictive role during speech comprehension.
    This does not mean that simulation provides an account of
    mindreading.

[^16]: Indeed, one of his objectives is to argue that mindreading is of
    secondary importance to mindshaping in explaining human social
    abilities.

[^17]: For example, Devine and Hughes (2013) describe an item from the
    "silent films" task as follows: "Harold (the main character) is
    sitting on the back of a van while he ﬁlls in a form. The driver,
    who is unaware of Harold's presence, is collecting laundry. The
    driver, who appears to have difﬁculty hearing, returns to his van,
    locks the door and drives away. Harold is then trapped in the back
    of the van." The critical question is: "Why do you think the driver
    locks Harold in the van?". A correct answer requires participants to
    acknowledge the critical role of the driver's ignorance: e.g.,
    "Because the driver didn't know Harold was in the van". Many
    3-year-olds succeed on developmentally sensitive tests of the
    necessary core concepts of understanding knowledge/ignorance (e.g.,
    Wellman & Liu, 2004), yet there was significant variance in the
    success of 8- to 13-year-olds in Devine and Hughes' (2013) study.
    Many participants provided only a partial explanation (e.g., in
    terms of the driver's desire to continue his rounds), or a
    completely incorrect explanation (e.g., ascribing a desire to kidnap
    Harold). We think it unlikely that these participants lacked a
    concept of knowledge versus ignorance or any other mindreading
    concept. Instead, we suggest that their difficulty was with
    identifying the most plausible and appropriate explanation.

[^18]: The idea that mindreaders might simulate the discussion itself
    fits with the spirit of some neo-Vygotskian accounts that give
    internalised dialogue a key role in higher mental functions (e.g.,
    Fernyhough, 2007). Our proposal does not entail simulation of the
    discussion, just the ability to simulate the results of such a
    discussion.
