# Introduction {#sec:introduction}

Start with the idea that shared intention, whatever that is, is
something which makes things we do together the genuinely joint
activities they are. We manifest shared intention in walking together,
playing a piano duet, or painting a house together. Philosophers, in
attempting to elucidate ideas about shared intention, have followed
three distinct strategies. One involves plural subjects, one aggregate
subjects, [^1] and one a reduction of the apparently plural or aggregate
to the merely individual. [^2] Whereas these strategies are usually
presented as conflicting attempts to characterise a single set of
phenomena, my thesis is that for each strategy there are phenomena which
can be correctly characterised only by following that strategy.

This thesis is not entirely novel. Both [List and Pettit
(2011)]{.citation cites="list_pettit:2011"} and [Bratman
(2022a)]{.citation cites="bratman:2022_shared"}, for instance, have
developed views on which, roughly speaking, a reductive strategy is
applied to small-scale, informal interactions whereas the aggregate
strategy is applied to corporate or institutional agents. [^3] My thesis
is that, similarly, a combination of strategies may be needed even when
restricting attention to small-scale interactions involving two or three
people.

What consequences would follow from this thesis if true---if, that is,
each of the three strategies is needed to characterise some phenomena
associated with shared intention? This would make things easier in one
way: it is not necessary for proponents of one strategy to refute the
theories invented by those following a different strategy. This would be
a good outcome because, despite much effort, few if any existing
attempts to refute particular theories of shared intention are widely
regarded as successful. But it would also make things harder in another
way. For if there is not one set of things that the different theories
are aiming to fully capture, then it will not be possible to specify the
target of a theory simply by reference to shared intention. We will need
a deeper understanding of what each particular theory is aiming to
explain.

Superficially, the need for a deeper understanding of targets of
explanation might not seem like much of a challenge. After all, we
already know that some theorists primarily target semantics [(Ludwig
2007)]{.citation cites="ludwig_collective_2007"}, others 'the deep
structure of our thought about acting together' [(Gilbert 2022,
2)]{.citation cites="gilbert:2022_simple"}, and yet others 'the
explanatory structures that directly underlie \[\...\] cases of acting
together' [(Bratman 2022b, 7)]{.citation cites="bratman:2022_planning"}.
There are, then, already things written about what theories of shared
intention aim to explain. Yet little attention has been given to the
possibility of co-existence. The usual assumption is that the various
strategies lead to theories which do contradict each other; or else,
more rarely, that multiple strategies can be combined in pursuit of a
single explanatory target.

We already know that it is coherent to pursue a combination of
strategies because some have already done this. [Bratman (2014,
127ff)]{.citation cites="bratman:2014_book"}, for example, considers the
possibility that his reductive strategy yields a theory on which there
are also what he calls 'group agents' (for which I shall use the term
'aggregate agents'; see section [5](#sec:aggregate){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:aggregate"}). This is a relatively conservative way of
combining strategies. Not only is there a single explanatory target, but
the group agents are merely epiphenomena of the reductive strategy. The
novel feature of what follows is the observation that different
explanatory targets require different strategies, which, as we will see,
appears to create a challenge to understanding co-existence.

If, as the following argues, multiple different strategies for shared
intention really are needed, then we all face a problem. The problem is
that we, as researchers, need, but lack, a common understanding of what
theories of shared intention are theories of.

# Living Out a Theory {#sec:live-it-out}

My thesis is that, for each strategy for explicating shared intention,
there are phenomena which can be correctly characterised only by
following that strategy. The argument for this thesis (in section
[8](#sec:multiple-strategies){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:multiple-strategies"}) will hinge on the idea that it is
possible, in some cases, to make a theory true by living it out. To
avoid surprises later, this section introduces that idea.

While laws of mechanics apply no less to us agents than to anything
else, it would usually be futile, perhaps even incoherent, to attempt to
move according to these laws. By contrast, one of the roles of mental
state attribution is to provide norms which individuals can measure
themselves against and aim to live by [(McGeer 2007; Zawidzki
2013)]{.citation
cites="mcgeer:2007_regulative zawidzki:2013_mindshaping"}.

To illustrate, consider the norm of agglomeration: it is a mistake to
knowingly have several intentions if it would be a mistake to knowingly
have one large intention agglomerating the several intentions ([(Bratman
1987)]{.citation cites="Bratman:1987xw"}). Whether this is actually a
mistake is controversial---several philosophers have defended views of
intention which are incompatible with it [(Setiya 2022, sec.
4)]{.citation cites="setiya:2022_intention"}. But regardless of that, it
is possible some people might, however mistakenly, take agglomeration as
an ideal by which to live. They check their intentions against the norm
and criticise each other for failing to implement it. It is equally
possible that another group of people, having considered the matter
deeply, intentionally disregard the norm of agglomeration. In their
view, adhering to this norm would be a mistake.

The possibility that some ordinary agents might adopt or reject the norm
of agglomeration in practice raises a question. Are ordinary agents'
views ever relevant to whether the norm is correct? Imagine we were to
say, crudely, that whether the norm holds is just a matter of whether
people take it to hold. Such a view faces myriad challenges. One is to
accommodate the fact that ordinary agents are wrong about norms, at
least occasionally (as the present author can attest). Another challenge
is to avoid a regress. This is not a line I propose to develop.
Alternatively, one might take a hard line and insist that ordinary
agents' views are irrelevant to whether the norm of agglomeration holds.
Taking this line is complicated by the fact that ordinary agents' views
shape at least some of their thoughts and actions. Their views are not
idle speculations about themselves but can form ideals which they
attempt to live out. Someone who takes the hard line cannot therefore
claim to be explaining how ordinary agents think or act. Minimally,
then, anyone pursuing this line would have to identify which phenomena
their position is supposed to explain. A further challenge is that
philosophers' methods involve intuition, imagination and reasoning about
consistency. These methods are good for identifying possible ways things
could be. But where there are multiple theoretically coherent positions
on which fully-informed ordinary agents reasonably differ, these methods
are not likely to yield insight into how things actually are.

Resolving the issue of how, if at all, ordinary agents' views are
relevant to the correctness of the norm of agglomeration is beyond
anything I can offer here (or anywhere else). But for our purposes, what
matters is a relatively uncontroversial point. There is a difference
between, on the one hand, things which are merely described and
predicted by a set of attributions and, on the other hand, agents who
are attempting to live out a set of attributions together with some
norms governing them. You might have a view about how combinations of
yeast, sugar and heat can be used to influence how dough rises, but the
dough itself has no perspective. And even if the dough achieved
self-awareness, that would matter only insofar as its self-awareness
influenced variables you care about. When ascribing attitudes and norms
to agents, by contrast, philosophers are not required to adopt the
outsiders' perspective---they can also take into account the agents' own
perspective.

Characterising intentions and norms from some agents' own perspective is
a familiar and coherent philosophical project. Where some agents are
attempting to live out a theory, it is reasonable to accept, in the
absence of overriding reasons such as incoherence, ignorance or
inertness, that the theory could be true of them.

Perhaps this will seem too hypothetical to be worth taking seriously. We
have no idea which, if any, ordinary agents aim to live by the norm of
agglomeration and which, if any, aim not to. My sense, however, is that
philosophical theories are not supposed to depend on any such facts.
They are, after all, usually developed independently of any
investigation into what ordinary agents think. [^4]

Not that it has to be hypothetical. Consider the familiar distinction
between revealed and stated preferences. To illustrate, in investigating
the value people place on a life, we could observe how much less people
pay to own a house near a known source of carcinogenic pollution. Or,
alternatively, we could give them a questionnaire asking how much they
would pay to eliminate the same risk. A wide range of research has
examined how revealed and stated preferences diverge ([(Carson et al.
1996; Alberini 2019)]{.citation
cites="carson:1996_contingent alberini:2019_revealed"}, for example).
There is also research on the factors that 'often create a wedge between
revealed and normative preferences' [(Beshears et al. 2008,
1788)]{.citation cites="beshears:2008_how"}. Divergences between
revealed and stated preferences matter in practice because they create
difficult questions for policy makers on how much to invest in
preventing deaths. For our, more theoretical purposes, the divergence
illustrates how understanding agents' actions requires taking into
account their own perspectives. Agents' stated preferences are views
about how a model applies to them. Because agents sometimes aim to live
out these views, they are not inert commentary. The problem is not
fundamentally that this complicates predicting behaviour. It is that
where agents aim to conform to a model, incorrect predictions do not
have the same significance.

The distinction between revealed and stated preferences illustrates the
dual role of theories of attitudes and norms, in prediction and in
offering ideals which people can attempt to live out. There is a
difference between, on the one hand, things which are merely described
and predicted by a set of attributions and, on the other hand, agents
who are are attempting to live out a set of attributions together with
some laws governing them. In the latter case, the agents' aiming to live
out a theory is a reason not to reject that theory insofar our aims
include understanding the agents' own perspective.

The argument that follows is an attempt to apply this general point to
philosophical theories of shared intention. My aim is to show that for
each of the three strategies for shared intention---plural, aggregate
and reductive---there is at least one consistent theory following this
strategy which it is possible for people to intentionally live out. This
thesis is probably either too odd or too obvious to be interesting in
its own right, but I will suggest that it has consequences which
complicate existing attempts to understand shared intention. As these
consequences depend on the aims of a theory of shared intention, I start
with the aims.

# Background on Shared Intention {#sec:background}

Why do we need a notion of shared intention at all? Because it is what
distinguishes genuinely joint activities from things people do in
parallel but merely individually [(Gilbert 1990; Bratman
2022b)]{.citation cites="gilbert_walking_1990 bratman:2022_planning"}.
This is, of course, at most a partial answer. The hope is that
investigating a notion such as shared intention will enable us,
eventually, to 'discover the nature of social groups in general'
[(Gilbert 1990, 2)]{.citation cites="gilbert_walking_1990"} and to
understand the conceptual, metaphysical and normative aspects of basic
forms of sociality [(Bratman 2014, 3)]{.citation
cites="bratman:2014_book"}. But one route to these lofty goals is to
focus on distinguishing genuinely joint from merely parallel activities
in mundane cases involving two or three people.

Ayesha and Ahmed have spent the morning in the kitchen washing the
dishes together. This is a paradigm case of joint activity. We can
contrast Ayesha and Ahmed's activities with those of two anti-social
people who act in parallel but merely individually. The idea is that
these other, anti-social people wash the dishes side-by-side, but their
actions are merely performed in parallel and so do not involve any joint
activity. What distinguishes Ayesha and Ahmed's activities from these
other people's?

A temptingly simple idea is to appeal to coordination. Could Ayesha and
Ahmed's activities be distinguished by virtue of being coordinated? The
obstacle is that acting in parallel can also involve coordination. The
actions of the other, anti-social people, who are merely acting in
parallel, may nevertheless need to be tightly coordinated because space
in their communal kitchen is limited. They may also politely anticipate
each other's movements and work around them. Mere coordination, then,
cannot distinguish joint activity.

The failure of this and other simple ideas hints that distinguishing
joint activities from their parallel but merely individual counterparts
is a deep and difficult problem. This problem is a variant of one about
ordinary, individual action. The 'Problem of Action' is to distinguish a
person's actions from things that merely happen to them [(Frankfurt
1978)]{.citation cites="frankfurt1978problem"}. If ordinary, individual
intention is key to solving that problem, perhaps some joint counterpart
of intention is the key to solving the problem of joint action. This
motivates using the term *shared intention* to label whatever the
normative or psychological structure is needed to distinguish joint
activities from things people do in parallel but merely individually.

Introducing a label for the problem does not take us very far towards a
solution. The problem now becomes to say what shared intention is. One
possibility is the plural subject strategy: shared intention is a matter
of there being one mental state with two or more subjects.

# The Plural Subject Strategy {#sec:plural}

A plural subject is two or more people who are each among the subjects
of a single intention or other mental state.

The difficulty of understanding the plural subject strategy is mainly
that it is so simple. Intentions and other mental states involve
subjects, attitudes and contents. The content is what distinguishes two
intentions from each other---the intention to cook dinner from the
intention to go for a walk, say, differ in content. Attitude is what
distinguishes intentions from other mental states---the intention to go
for a walk differs in attitude from the desire to go for a walk. And the
subject is what distinguishes your mental states from mine. The idea of
the plural subject strategy is just that intentions can have more than
one subject. You and I can share an intention in the same sense that
siblings share a parent. Your intention to walk may also be my intention
to walk: you and I are equally subjects of this intention.

It is helpful, in thinking about the contrast between individual and
plural subjects, to draw on a related distinction between distributive
and collective interpretations of sentences. Consider these sentences:

1.  The fans left the stadium.

2.  The fans completely blocked the road. []{#item:fans-blocking
    label="item:fans-blocking"}

The first sentence is naturally read distributively: it is a matter of
each fan individually leaving. But the second sentence is naturally read
collectively. As the road is very wide, not even the largest individual
fan did much at all to block the road. But because so many fans were
milling around in the road, it was impossible to traverse it. So
understood, the second sentence's truth is not, or not only, a matter of
each fan individually blocking the road. This is a collective reading.
The distinction seems applicable to sentences about intention:

1.  The twins intended to win the race. []{#item:twins-intention
    label="item:twins-intention"}

If we imagine a race that can only have one winner, a 100 meter sprint,
say, then it is natural to read this sentence distributively. Its truth
is just a matter of each twin intending to win the race. But if we
imagine the twins running in a three-legged race together, it seems
possible to read the sentence collectively. On this reading, there is
one intention whose subject is the twins. They are, to put it
colourfully, of one mind.

We can describe the twins as a *plural subject*. But note that the
plural subject is nothing other than the twins themselves. We must avoid
confusion on this point in order to distinguish plural subjects from
aggregate subjects, which are fundamentally different (more on this in
section [5](#sec:aggregate){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:aggregate"}).

The plural subject strategy requires no novel conceptual, metaphysical
or normative ingredients over and above those already required in a
theory of ordinary, individual action---it can be implemented in ways
that respect Bratman's continuity thesis. [^5] Just as the truth of the
collective reading of
([\[item:fans-blocking\]](#item:fans-blocking){reference-type="ref"
reference="item:fans-blocking"}) () does not require anything other than
the fans to mill in the road, so the truth of statements about intention
collectively read requires nothing other than intentions and their
subjects. [^6]

But are there really plural subjects of intention? One possibility is
that there merely seem to be, and are not actually, collective readings
of sentences about intentions like
([\[item:twins-intention\]](#item:twins-intention){reference-type="ref"
reference="item:twins-intention"}) above. There are a range of
objections along these lines. Most extreme is the claim that all
apparently collective predication is really disguised distributive
predication. A more limited objection is that statements about actions
and intentions merely seem to have collective readings. [Ludwig (2016,
chap. 9)]{.citation cites="ludwig:2016_individual"} offers a detailed
discussion along these lines. His conclusion is carefully nuanced:

> 'we do not need to accept genuine plural \[\...\] agents into our
> ontology in order to accept what we say about \[\...\] collective
> action, at least insofar as we express this using plural subject
> terms.' [(Ludwig 2016, 168)]{.citation cites="ludwig:2016_individual"}

Ludwig might be right that semantic considerations do not force us to
accept that plural subjects exist. Given his further premise that plural
subjects should be avoided if possible, this would be a compelling
argument against the existence of coherent collective readings. But,
importantly, Ludwig finds nothing forcing us to reject their existence
either. So as long as there is either no general presumption against
plural subjects or else sufficient reason to suppose that they are
necessary, it is not incoherent to imagine statements about intention
have true collective readings. Minimally, collective readings are a
helpful tool for clarifying what the plural subject strategy is.

But is it really coherent to suppose that intentions might have more
than one subject? One might object that to have an intention it is
necessary to have a mind; and that having a mind minimally involves
having a range of mental states, and perhaps even being self-aware. [^7]
[Schmid (2013)]{.citation cites="Schmid:2013_self"}, who has perhaps the
best-developed version of the plural subject strategy, accepts this
constraint but argues that there are no good grounds for supposing that
it could not be met. Likewise, [Helm (2008)]{.citation
cites="helm_plural_2008"} argues that there are plural subjects with a
range of 'emotions and desires in the right sort of rational structure'
[(Helm 2008, 29)]{.citation cites="helm_plural_2008"}. Of course this
would mean that plural subjects are unlikely to be involved in
spontaneous interactions between strangers, as when I am struggling to
propel my heavy push chair on to the bus and you helpfully seize the
front and we lift together. Plural subjects on views like Schmid's or
Helm's would require vastly more intimate, long-term connections between
individuals.

If we follow Schmid or Helm, it is possible to wonder how there could be
plural subjects. And the sense of mystery one might have about this
could, perhaps, motivate rejecting the entire strategy in favour of
apparently less mysterious alternatives. But this would be an error. Any
of the strategies can be developed in ways that will seem mysterious to
at least some philosophers. But one of my aims is to draw attention to
the existence of straightforward, nonmysterious ways of developing each
strategy.

An alternative, potentially less mysterious plural subject view might be
based on rejecting the claim that having an intention entails having a
range of mental states. This view could be inspired by reflection that
humans are prone to attribute mental states on the slightest of pretexts
to things which, as they know, lack not only minds but even physical
bodies [(Heider and Simmel 1944)]{.citation cites="Heider:1944ts"}. [^8]
Whether or not things cannot actually have intentions without having
minds, no such constraint appears to apply to at least one significant
strand of everyday thinking. Perhaps, then, the plural subject strategy
is needed for capturing ways in which some people sometimes think.

We can take this one step further. Here is a way in which you and I
could become the plural subject of an intention. We each somehow become
convinced, however mistakenly, that you and I are the plural subjects of
an intention to cook dinner. This thought might influence our behaviour:
thinking, perhaps mistakenly, that having this intention means we are
subject to various norms, we might aim to act in ways that conform to
them. We are, by our lights, acting as if we had this intention. We
could also be taking for granted that we were plural subjects of a range
of other beliefs, desires and mental states, and perhaps explicitly
attributing some as our activity unfolds. And others, if they became
convinced, perhaps mistakenly, that we had this intention, might also
think and act accordingly. In this way, what began as merely a mistake
became real enough to shape the social world through being adopted as a
normative ideal. [^9]

In this section I have introduced the plural subject strategy and
offered a preliminary and superficial case for its theoretical
coherence. Following this strategy can lead to various quite different
theories. On some theories, the existence of plural subjects involves
long-term, intimate connections capable of supporting a shared mental
life. On other possible theories, plural subjects can be temporary
phenomena arising from the specific needs of a moment.

This falls short of showing that the plural subject strategy is
successful. For it to succeed, minimally there must be cases in which
the existence of plural subjects is actually what distinguishes joint
activities from things people do in parallel but merely individually.
(At least that is what one quite prominent approach requires, as we saw
in section [3](#sec:background){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:background"}.) I have tried to indicate the difficulties
involved in showing that no such cases could exist. But of course we
have not seen positive grounds to suppose that there are now, or have
ever been, any intentions (or other mental states) which do have plural
subjects. Following the approach of section
[2](#sec:live-it-out){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:live-it-out"},
the possibility that there is a theoretically coherent plural subject
theory which some people could aim to live out is reason to accept that
such a theory could capture an aspect of shared intention.

For what it is worth, my own sense is that it would be quite hard to
establish, in practice, that a particular situation did involve a plural
subject, and that the difficulty of doing so may have been
underestimated. To illustrate, [Schmid (2008)]{.citation
cites="Schmid:2008"} claims that plural agents feature in common sense
thinking. This claim is hard to evaluate because other philosophers
would probably reject it ([(Ludwig 2016)]{.citation
cites="ludwig:2016_individual"}, perhaps). Certainly philosophers seem
vulnerable to making wrong assumptions about common sense thinking in
other cases [(e.g. Starmans and Friedman 2012, 2013; Nagel, Mar, and San
Juan 2013)]{.citation
cites="starmans:2012_folk nagel:2013_authentic starmans:2013_taking"}.
One as yet unresolved challenge is to develop an operationalisation
which would enable us to distinguish someone thinking and acting in
terms of plural subjects from someone operating with a different
conception of shared intention. Whereas we have multiple methods for
identifying stated preferences (including contingent valuation and
choice modelling), we currently lack any hint about how we might
identify attitudes towards plural subjects. This challenge is made
harder by the need to distinguish plural subjects from aggregate
subjects.

# The Aggregate Subject Strategy {#sec:aggregate}

An aggregate subject is a subject with proper parts which are themselves
subjects in their own right. If you have intentions and some proper
parts of you also have intentions of their own, then you are an
aggregate subject.

Although our interest is in subjects of intention, and of mental states
generally, a non-mental illustration may be helpful. The Portuguese man
o'war, *Physalia physalis*, is an animal composed of polyps which are
themselves born as animals in their own right. Why is the man o'war an
aggregate subject rather than a plural subject? Because it is
numerically distinct from the animals which compose it. These may change
over its lifetime. By contrast, in the case of a plural subject, there
is nothing that could continue to exist if one of the individuals ceases
to exist. A plural subject is not a thing at all: it is just some
individuals. An aggregate subject, even one which right now consists of
nothing but some individuals, is nevertheless a thing that is logically
distinct from the individuals which comprise it.

For a non-mental illustration which features both plural and aggregate
subjects, consider:

1.  The protestors formed a barrier which blocked the entrance.

Forming the barrier is something the protestors do collectively. They
(and no other thing) are the plural subject of the forming. But in
talking about the barrier we have introduced an aggregate entity.
Although it is composed of the protestors and nothing else, it is
numerically distinct from them. We know the barrier is distinct from the
protestors because one of the protestors might abandon the barrier and
be replaced by a new protestor.

Not everything true of an aggregate subject is true of a corresponding
plural subject, even when, as in the protestors' case, the only parts of
the aggregate subject are the plural subject. For example, the barrier
may be capable of surviving an assault which would destroy the plural
subject. And, conversely, it is true that the plural subject formed the
barrier but false that the aggregate subject did so. The mental case is
similar. To be an aggregate subject, a thing must have its own
intentions (or other mental states) which are at least potentially
distinct from those of its parts [(Björnsson and Hess 2017,
274)]{.citation cites="bjornsson:2017_corporate"}.

How could there be aggregate subjects of intention? As List and Pettit
put it:

> 'Let a collection of individuals form and act on a single, robustly
> rational body of attitudes \[\...\] and it will be an agent.'

Individuals sometimes act in this way only because their interests are
so closely aligned, as when a variety of finance professionals all rush
to exploit a tax loophole so that state finances appear ravaged by a
many-handed beast. [^10] Alternatively, individuals may authorise a
representative to speak for them as a group. Such cases are unlikely to
be theoretically interesting given our aim of investigating shared
intention more broadly [(List and Pettit 2011, 7ff)]{.citation
cites="list_pettit:2011"}. Instead we should focus on cases where an
aggregate agent has what Sugden calls *autonomy*:

> An aggregate subject has autonomy if there is 'the possibility that
> every member of the group has an individual preference for y over x
> (say, each prefers wine bars to pubs) while the group acts on an
> objective that ranks x above y.' [(Sugden 2000)]{.citation
> cites="Sugden:2000mw"}

The challenge, then, is to explain how there can be aggregate subjects
which are autonomous from the subjects which compose them.

One approach to meeting this challenge borrows from decision theory. It
is possible to use decision theory as an 'elucidation of the notions of
subjective probability \[roughly, belief\] and subjective desirability
or utility \[roughly, desire\]' [(Jeffrey 1983, xi)]{.citation
cites="Jeffrey:1983oe"}. Whether or not there are other ways of
elucidating attitudes, decision theory provides one coherent way of
thinking about them. But decision theory is also agnostic about what
subjects are. As long as a thing's behaviour fits a certain pattern, one
that is specified by axioms linking attitudes to actions, the thing can
coherently be attributed preferences. This is why decision theory and
its derivatives can be applied not only in describing humans but also
bacteria, business organisations and countries [(Dixit, Skeath, and
Reiley 2014, chap. 10)]{.citation cites="dixit:2014_games"}. Being
agnostic about what subjects are makes it a useful tool for constructing
a theory of aggregate agents.

In essence, the construction goes like this. [^11] Two or more
individuals take themselves, rightly or wrongly, to be components of an
aggregate agent. These individuals each ascribe preferences, and perhaps
other attitudes, to the aggregate agent, and they all ascribe the same
attitudes. They then use these preferences to rank combinations of
individual actions, and each individual selects an action from a
highest-ranking combination. Given the usual axioms about preferences
being transitive and so on [(Steele and Stefánsson 2020)]{.citation
cites="steele:2020_decision"}, and given some background assumptions
about the individuals' knowledge of their situation, it will be possible
to use decision theory to model the situation as if there were an
aggregate agent. And if we follow Jeffrey in taking decision theory as
elucidating preference and other attitudes, we can infer that there
actually is an aggregate agent. Further, because the preferences and
other attitudes ascribed by the individuals need not be their own, the
aggregate agent has autonomy in the above sense.

How might the aggregate subject strategy provide a notion of shared
intention? And how might it enable us to distinguish joint actions from
things people do in parallel but merely individually (see section
[3](#sec:background){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:background"})?
One possibility is to stipulate that the intentions arrived at by
individuals through the process of determining how the aggregate agent
will act comprise a shared intention ([(Gold and Sugden 2007)]{.citation
cites="Gold:2007zd"}; alternative views are offered by [(Bardsley
2007)]{.citation cites="bardsley:2007_collective"} and [(Pacherie
2013)]{.citation cites="pacherie:2013_lite"}). On this view, one way for
an activity to be genuinely joint is for it to issue from reasoning
about the preferences of an aggregate subject where each reasoner is a
part of that aggregate subject. [^12]

None of this shows, of course, that there actually are aggregate
subjects of preference or intention. Even assuming there are, we cannot
yet say whether their existence is actually what distinguishes joint
activities from things people do in parallel but merely individually. My
aim in this section was merely to defend the theoretical possibility of
aggregate subjects.

# The Reductive Strategy {#sec:reductive}

If you seek to characterise shared intention entirely in terms of
ordinary, individual subjects and their ordinary, individual attitudes
then you are pursuing the reductive strategy.

Contemporary interest in the reductive strategy starts with [Sellars
(1963, 203)]{.citation cites="sellars:1963_imperatives"}'s observation
that statements to the effect that we intend that we cook dinner are
'clearly not the logical sum of' statements about each of us
individually intending that we cook dinner ([(Tuomela and Miller
1988)]{.citation cites="tuomela_we-intentions_1988"}). Apparently, then,
our having a shared intention that we cook dinner together cannot
consist simply in our each intending this. A natural question is whether
there is any combination of ordinary, individual intentions, knowledge
states or other mental attitudes our having which could be necessary or
sufficient for us to have a shared intention that we cook dinner.

The most extensively developed and widely discussed attempt to provide
sufficient conditions for shared intention is [Bratman (2014)]{.citation
cites="bratman:2014_book"}'s. The full account is complex but the core
idea, put roughly, is this. For us to have a shared intention that we
cook dinner, it suffices that we each intend that we cook dinner, that
we intend to do so by way and because of these intentions, and that this
is all common knowledge among us.

Proponents of the reductive strategy have succeeded in providing sets of
necessary or sufficient conditions which have intuitive pull for some
and against which none of the published counterexamples have been widely
accepted as successful. This is remarkable given that the model for
Bratman and several others is Grice's analysis of meaning [(Bratman
1992, footnote 13 to p. 334)]{.citation cites="Bratman:1992mi"}, which
met a different fate. A 'flood' of counterexamples to Grice's analysis
led to extensive revisions, to which further counterexamples were
developed [(Searle 2007, 11)]{.citation cites="searle:2007_grice"}.
Confidence in the project's eventual success was shaken when, in a
dramatic change of direction, Schiffer, who was formerly a leading
proponent of the Gricean analysis, argued that the whole project was
based on a mistake. [^13] While Grice's analysis has continued to
inspire various projects ([(Moore 2017)]{.citation
cites="moore:2016_gricean"}, for example), we are no closer to a
successful reductive analysis. By contrast, generally accepted
counterexamples to reductive sets of necessary or sufficient conditions
for shared intention appear to be rare.

A diversity of views about the features of shared intentions can be
found in the reductive strategy. The various conditions proposed imply
conflicting views about whether having a shared intention invariably
involves dispositions to help (for: [(Bratman 2014, 56--57)]{.citation
cites="bratman:2014_book"}; against: [(Bratman 1992)]{.citation
cites="Bratman:1992mi"}, [(Ludwig 2007)]{.citation
cites="ludwig_collective_2007"}), common knowledge (for: [(Bratman
1993)]{.citation cites="Bratman:1993je"}; against: [(Blomberg
2016)]{.citation cites="blomberg:2015_common"}), and corresponding
individual intentions on each subject's part (for: [(Bratman
1992)]{.citation cites="Bratman:1992mi"}; against: [(Sellars
1963)]{.citation cites="sellars:1963_imperatives"}). There are also
further issues on which theorists could disagree, including on whether
shared intention invariably involves contralateral commitment (for:
[(Gilbert 2009)]{.citation cites="gilbert:2009shared"}; against: [(Roth
2004, 361)]{.citation cites="Roth:2004ki"}), cooperation [(Salomone-Sehr
2022)]{.citation cites="salomone-sehr:2022_cooperation"} or
nonobservational knowledge [(Roessler 2024)]{.citation
cites="roessler:2020_plural"}.

This gives rise to a challenge to the reductive strategy. For the
diversity makes it unclear when proponents of the reductive strategy can
coherently be interpreted as offering competing attempts to characterise
a single thing and when as offering compatible attempts to characterise
different things. [^14]

The reductive strategy allows us to construct many theories, each
internally theoretically coherent but inconsistent with other reductive
theories that share an explanandum. For any combination of views about
the features of shared intention, it would be possible to construct a
coherent reductive theory. If we simplify and regard the six features
mentioned above as binary, this yields 64 reductive theories. The
scarcity of counterexamples cuts two ways.

# The Limits of a Metatheoretical Principle

We have seen that the three strategies each yield theoretically coherent
positions, and, further, that at least one of these strategies alone
yields many theoretically coherent positions. Can we decide between the
positions by invoking metatheoretical principles? This idea has been
carefully developed by Bratman:

> 'If we can get a plausible model of modest sociality without appealing
> to a fundamental discontinuity in the step from individual planning
> agency to such sociality, then there is a presumption against an
> appeal to such a discontinuity in our theorising.' [(Bratman 2014,
> 36)]{.citation cites="bratman:2014_book"}

If true, this principle provides a good reason to prefer the reductive
strategy over theories like that of [Searle (1990)]{.citation
cites="Searle:1990em"} and perhaps also that of [Gilbert
(2013)]{.citation cites="gilbert:2014_book"}. [^15] This is because each
of those theorists postulates a fundamental discontinuity. In Searle's
case, this is a novel kind of attitude, the 'we-intention', which
differs from ordinary intention along the same dimension as desire
differs from intention. [^16] For her part, Gilbert postulates a novel
kind of commitment and associated nonmoral norms. The novel kinds of
intention and commitment are fundamental discontinuities.

Although Bratman's metatheoretical principle rules against some
theories, it does not exclude many of those derived from the reductive
strategy. Nor does it exclude the plural and aggregate subject
strategies outright. After all, the whole point of plural subjects is
that they are nothing but some subjects [(Boolos 1984)]{.citation
cites="boolos:1984_value"}. And the bare idea of an aggregate subject is
no more a fundamental discontinuity than is a barrier composed of
protestors. Further, as we have seen (in sections
[4](#sec:plural){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:plural"} and
[5](#sec:aggregate){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:aggregate"}),
both plural subject and the aggregate subject strategies can be
implemented without appealing to fundamental discontinuities.

Apparently, then, Bratman's metatheoretical principle is limited. There
are theories from each of the three strategies---plural, aggregate and
reductive---between which it fails to discriminate.

This is why I have presented the strategies in an unusual order. The
usual way is to start with the reductive strategy and then possibly to
justify adopting one of the others by some failure of that strategy
(see, for example, [(Helm 2008)]{.citation cites="helm_plural_2008"} ).
In my view that is a mistake. There is no consensus on attempts to
demonstrate failure of the reductive strategy generally. Quite the
opposite: after three decades there is not yet even a successful
published counterexample to the most widely discussed reductive theory
([(Bratman 1992)]{.citation cites="Bratman:1992mi"}; [(Bratman
2022b)]{.citation cites="bratman:2022_planning"}). But, equally, the
mere absence of successful objections to a theory is not enough to
establish its truth. The plural and aggregate subject strategies are
significant not because the reductive strategy can be shown to fail but
because they also yield theoretically coherent, as yet unfalsified
theories.

These are deep waters. Some researchers hold that plural subjects should
be avoided if possible, even narrowly logical ones (see [(Ludwig
2016)]{.citation cites="ludwig:2016_individual"} cited in section
[4](#sec:plural){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:plural"}). Some
even suggest that 'all plural locutions should be paraphrased away'.
[^17] Were this true, the plural subject strategy might be ruled out for
reasons not specifically psychological. As this illustrates, the
considerations offered here fall far short of demonstrating that it
would be impossible to find general principles which do discriminate
among the three strategies for shared intention.

But there is also a positive argument for my thesis that all three
strategies are needed.

# Do We Need Multiple Strategies for Shared Intention? {#sec:multiple-strategies}

It is possible for people to intentionally live out one or another
theory of shared intention: to think and act as if that theory were true
of them. This indicates that no one theory alone could be sufficient to
fully characterise shared intention. Or so I will argue in this section.

For each of the three strategies, there are recipes you and I could
explicitly aim to follow. To illustrate, suppose the time for us to face
the growing pile of dirty dishes in our kitchen has finally come. Having
both been inspired by [Schmid (2008)]{.citation cites="Schmid:2008"}, we
might regard ourselves as the plural subject of an intention to wash the
dishes and act accordingly (see section
[4](#sec:plural){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:plural"}). Or
perhaps what comes to mind is instead an idea about ascribing
preferences to an aggregate subject and doing our parts to fulfill them
(see section [5](#sec:aggregate){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:aggregate"}). Or maybe we have both just been reading
[Bratman (2014)]{.citation cites="bratman:2014_book"} and are impressed
that we could benefit by forming and making explicit the intentions he
identifies, thereby meeting his sufficient conditions for shared
intention (see section [6](#sec:reductive){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:reductive"}). This being new to us, we even decide to
write everything down so that we can track the attitudes and actions.
Things go well and we continue to use the recipe for shared intention in
our future activities. Over time our use of the chosen recipe becomes so
familiar that we hardly need to think about it at all.

The possibility of our aiming to follow a recipe associated with any one
of the three strategies for shared intention, first explicitly and then
with greater skill, suggests that no one strategy can claim to be
uniquely correct. Instead, capturing the full range of phenomena
involving shared intention will require theories associated with several
different strategies.

The extent to which we actually succeed in following a recipe may be
quite limited, much as our stated preferences alone may explain only a
small part of our behaviour (see section
[2](#sec:live-it-out){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:live-it-out"}). What matters for our purposes, however,
is just that the aim of living out the theory is not entirely inert. It
should influence some of our thoughts and actions. This is what makes it
reasonable to accept, in the absence of overriding reasons, that the
theory could be true of us.

It may be helpful to consider possible responses to this position. One
response starts with the observation that following a recipe together
may involve us having a shared intention to do so. Probably, then, not
all shared intention is a consequence of our intentionally living out a
theory of shared intention. We might therefore be motivated to search
for phylogenically or ontogenically foundational forms of shared
intention (see, for example, [(Tollefsen 2005; Rakoczy and Tomasello
2007; Pacherie 2013)]{.citation
cites="Tollefsen:2005vh Rakoczy:2007ou pacherie:2013_lite"}). Perhaps it
would even be possible, eventually, to relate strategies and theories to
different stages and needs. This is a radical response which breaks from
the most extensively developed, best defended theories currently
available, which give no such importance to evolutionary or
developmental considerations.

An alternative response would aim to distinguish recipes that humans
actually follow, noting that these may be fewer than those which could
in principle be used. [^18] There are at least two potential sources of
inspiration for this response. One is narrowly philosophical attempts to
establish that aggregate or plural subjects of shared intention are
either practically indispensable or required for certain explanatory
purposes. ([(Roth 2014)]{.citation cites="roth:2014_indispensability"}
presents both kinds of argument, for example.) The other source of
inspiration for this response could be taken from [Gomez-Lavin and
Rachar (2019)]{.citation cites="gomez-lavin:2019_normativity"}, who
offer findings which they interpret as showing that everyday thinking
involves distinctive features of [Gilbert (2013)]{.citation
cites="gilbert:2014_book"}'s account of shared intention. Just here we
encounter a dilemma. Narrowly philosophical arguments may establish that
humans do follow one recipe but appear unlikely to show that they do not
also follow other recipes. On the other hand, taking inspiration from
experimental research involves a radical departure from the kinds of
consideration usually taken to motivate a theory of shared intention.
This is clear from responses to [Gomez-Lavin and Rachar
(2019)]{.citation cites="gomez-lavin:2019_normativity"}'s work, which
include [Löhr (2022)]{.citation cites="lohr:2022_recent"} who challenges
their interpretation on methodological grounds and [Michael and
Butterfill (2022)]{.citation cites="michael:2022_intuitions"} who offer
apparently contrasting findings. Those authors' interest in discovering
how people actually think about joint activities has no counterpart in
the work of the leading philosophers.

A bolder and more orthodox response might be to allow that we could
coherently follow any of the recipes but deny that all of them yield
shared intention (or, more ambitiously, even that any do). The challenge
for proponents of this response is to identify grounds for rejecting the
view that following the recipes yields genuine shared intention. They
would need to enable all of us, as researchers, to know which things a
theory of shared intention should explain independently of our knowing
which theory is true. As things stand now, philosophers typically use
particular examples of joint activities to introduce the topic (see
section [1](#sec:introduction){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:introduction"}, and [(Bratman 2014, 5--6)]{.citation
cites="bratman:2014_book"}, for example). The usual assumption is that
the examples are sufficient to identify 'shared activity of the sort we
are trying to understand' [(Bratman 2014, 6)]{.citation
cites="bratman:2014_book"}. But intentionally following one of the
recipes is, of course, one way of walking together, playing a piano
duet, or painting a house together. So if examples of joint activities
provide us as researchers with a common understanding of the things to
be explained, that common understanding supports the view that more than
one strategy's recipes are needed to capture them. Opponents of this
view need further theory-independent ways of identifying what is to be
explained.

Overall, it seems plausible that at least three different strategies for
shared intention are needed. This is because each of the plural,
aggregate and reductive strategies is associated with a recipe people
could intentionally follow and thereby manifest phenomena for
characterising which the corresponding strategy is needed.

# Conclusion

I have explored three strategies for elucidating ideas about shared
intention. The plural, aggregate and reductive strategies are often
regarded as competing attempts to characterise a single target.
Proponents of the plural and aggregate subject strategies typically
object that the reductive strategies fail, while proponents of reductive
strategies aim to show that the other strategies are not needed (or, if
they are needed, that they can be tacked on to a reductive strategy; see
[1](#sec:introduction){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:introduction"}). Despite much effort, no such arguments
currently enable us to determine which strategy is correct. In contrast,
I have appealed to the possibility of intentionally living out different
theories to argue that for each strategy there are phenomena which can
be correctly characterised only by following that strategy (section
[8](#sec:multiple-strategies){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:multiple-strategies"}). There may also be many theories
derived from the reductive strategy for which the same is true (section
[6](#sec:reductive){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:reductive"}).

If correct, this conclusion marks a collective success. Whereas it was
initially assumed that at most one strategy would work, the careful
development of multiple theories by their various proponents suggests
there are multiple theoretically coherent possibilities, each having
intuitive appeal to some.

Despite the success, this conclusion is not a tenable stopping point.
Whereas progress surely requires that we can discover grounds to reject
some theories, the conclusion that we need multiple strategies seems to
imply that anything goes in constructing theories of shared intention.

What to do? The conclusion that we need multiple strategies rests on the
premise that we need at least one theory of shared intention. One way to
avoid it might be to reject this premise (see footnote
[2](#fn:no-shared-intention){reference-type="ref"
reference="fn:no-shared-intention"} on page for discussions which may
motivate considering this option). But while questioning the premise may
lead to fresh insights, the idea that we might completely do away with
theories of shared intention seems unpromising insofar as some existing
theories have been fruitfully applied beyond philosophy. [^19]

A more hopeful response to the untenable conclusion would be to take
inspiration from other domains where multiple apparently incompatible
approaches have been discovered. We might draw a very inexact parallel
with the twin possibilities of using sets to replace plural
quantification and of using plural quantification to construct sets
[(Linnebo 2022, sec. 4.3)]{.citation cites="linnebo:2022_plural"}.
Perhaps---so the hopeful response---we can show that the strategies for
shared intention yield theories which are in some sense equivalent ways
of elucidating a single set of ideas about shared intention. [^20] Or
perhaps the informal nature of the theories and their diversity means
that this response is just too hopeful.

A simpler response is also available. Several researchers have pointed
to things which stand in need of explanation and which, they suggest,
might be explained using a theory of shared intention. These include
behavioural and neuroscientific findings [(Gallotti and Frith
2013)]{.citation cites="gallotti:2013_social"}, patterns in cognitive
development [(Tomasello and Carpenter 2007)]{.citation
cites="Tomasello:2007gl"}, and decision making [(Sugden 2000)]{.citation
cites="Sugden:2000mw"}. In some cases this has led to debate on which
things theories of shared intention are supposed to explain (see, for
example, [(Bratman 2014)]{.citation cites="bratman:2014_book"} on [(Gold
and Sugden 2007)]{.citation cites="Gold:2007zd"}). One way to make
further progress would be, in offering a theory about shared intention,
to specify things which stand in need of explanation in a way that can
be understood independently of the theory's truth or falsity; and to
formulate the theory in such a way that makes it possible to determine,
eventually, whether it does actually explain those things.

To illustrate how this might go, consider a relatively easy family of
questions. How do various groups of individuals represent the activities
of some agents acting together in particular situations? Instead of
interpreting existing theories as claims about how shared intention is,
we can also interpret (or usefully misinterpret) them as theories about
how people represent situations involving shared intention. Generating
predictions from existing theories is difficult but there are signs that
this might be possible. [^21] Relative to this project---that of
discovering how individuals represent joint activities---the existence
of many theories is not a bad thing. After all, there may well be
differences between species, between infants, children and adults, and
between cultures. Further, a single individual may adopt different
models in different situations. Diversity in the theories of shared
intention may enable us to discover genuine diversity in the things to
be explained.

In conclusion, we researchers need, but lack, a common understanding of
what theories of shared intention are theories of. It has been fruitful
to construct different models of how aspects of shared intention might
be. The next step is to find out which models explain which things.

[^1]: Where I use 'aggregate', others have used 'collective' [(Björnsson
    and Hess 2017, 274)]{.citation cites="bjornsson:2017_corporate"} and
    'group' [List and Pettit (2011, 74)]{.citation
    cites="list_pettit:2011"}. Although more familiar, I have avoided
    these terms because they seem to me to risk inviting confusing
    aggregate subjects and plural subjects.

[^2]: []{#fn:no-shared-intention label="fn:no-shared-intention"} This is
    not an exhaustive division of strategies. It would also be possible
    to reject the idea that we need a notion of shared intention at all.
    Although beyond the scope of this essay, there are interesting
    discussions which may motivate considering this view in [Baier
    (1997)]{.citation cites="baier:1997_joint"}, [Chant
    (2007)]{.citation cites="chant_unintentional_2007"}, [Petersson
    (2007)]{.citation cites="petersson_collectivity_2007"}, and
    [Longworth (2019, 13ff)]{.citation cites="longworth:2019_sharing"}.

    It is also not the only way of dividing strategies. [Schweikard and
    Schmid (2021, sec. 3)]{.citation cites="schweikard:2021_collective"}
    offer a division into 'content-, mode-, and subject-accounts of
    collective intentionality.' These cut across the division into
    plural, aggregate and reductive. Both the plural subject and the
    aggregate subject strategies yield 'subject-accounts' while the
    reductive strategy would yield content-accounts.

[^3]: See [List and Pettit (2011, 33)]{.citation
    cites="list_pettit:2011"} on 'joint intentions' and [Bratman (2022a,
    135ff)]{.citation cites="bratman:2022_shared"} on 'institutional
    intentions'.

[^4]: [Gilbert (2009, 175)]{.citation cites="gilbert:2009shared"} does
    offer a theory which appears to involve stipulations about ordinary
    agents' views. But this is not supported by investigation, nor is
    there any explicit suggestion that an investigation would support
    the theory. Others have attempted to investigate aspects of how well
    Gilbert's theory captures ordinary agents' views [(Gomez-Lavin and
    Rachar 2019; Michael and Butterfill 2022)]{.citation
    cites="gomez-lavin:2019_normativity michael:2022_intuitions"}. But
    those researchers are careful to distinguish the aims of their
    investigations from supporting, or refuting, Gilbert's philosophical
    position. The leading philosophical theories of attitudes and norms
    are about ways people might reasonably be. It is all entirely
    hypothetical.

[^5]: See [Bratman (2014, 8)]{.citation cites="bratman:2014_book"}:
    'This is the continuity thesis. As we might try saying: once God
    created individual planning agents and placed those agents in a
    world in which they have relevant knowledge of each other's minds,
    nothing fundamentally new-conceptually, metaphysically, or
    normatively-needs to be added for there to be modest sociality.'

[^6]: Here I am assuming Ontological Innocence, which is a controversial
    claim [(Linnebo 2022, sec. 5)]{.citation
    cites="linnebo:2022_plural"}.

[^7]: Note that this line of objection could be pursued independently of
    whether intentions are mental states. On some views, intentions are
    not mental states [(Thompson 2008; Russell 2018)]{.citation
    cites="thompson:2008_life russell:2018_intention"} but having them
    might nevertheless require having a mind.

[^8]: Alternative motivation for intentions without much in the way of
    other mental states is offered by Bratman's characterisation of what
    he calls 'social-procedural-rule-based institutional Intentions'
    [(Bratman 2022a, 147--50)]{.citation cites="bratman:2022_shared"}.

[^9]: I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for observing that [Rovane
    (1998, 137ff)]{.citation cites="rovane:1998_bounds"} offers an
    extended discussion of the possibility that very committed people
    might, over time, achieve such a high degree of rational unity that
    'it would not be possible to engage just one of its human
    constituents separately' (p. 141). (The scenario I am imagining is
    merely one in which being a plural subject is taken as a normative
    ideal.)

[^10]: See https://correctiv.org/top-stories/2021/10/21/cumex-files-2/

[^11]: The construction is borrowed from [Bacharach (2006)]{.citation
    cites="Bacharach:2006fk"} and [Sugden (2000)]{.citation
    cites="Sugden:2000mw"}. I am not claiming that their views require
    aggregate subjects, only that some of their ideas can be (mis?)used
    to develop the aggregate subject strategy.

[^12]: Whereas [Gold and Sugden (2007)]{.citation cites="Gold:2007zd"}
    appear to defend their view as the only kind of shared intention,
    [Pacherie (2013)]{.citation cites="pacherie:2013_lite"} explicitly
    offers a view on which the aggregate subject strategy and the
    reductive strategy each characterise forms of shared intention.
    Also, as none of these researchers present their views as involving
    aggregate subjects, my suggestion is only that we can use their
    ideas in pursuing the aggregate subject strategy.

[^13]: See [Schiffer (1987, 265)]{.citation cites="Schiffer:1987zb"}:
    'if one were to make a list of all the things philosophers have in
    mind when they talk of "theories of meaning or intentional content,"
    then I would claim that there are no true theories satisfying the
    descriptions on that list. The questions being asked \[\...\] that
    would require positive theories as answers all have false
    presuppositions.'

[^14]: Individual theorists have expressed both views. For instance,
    [Ludwig (2007)]{.citation cites="ludwig_collective_2007"} positions
    his view as characterising something distinct from Bratman's, while
    [Pacherie (2013)]{.citation cites="pacherie:2013_lite"} positions
    her view as a revision of Bratman's. My question is whether
    interpreting their views contrary to their statements would be
    theoretically coherent.

[^15]: There is room for uncertainty about whether Gilbert's theory
    meets the requirement about no fundamental discontinuities. [Smith
    (2015, 55ff)]{.citation cites="smith:2015_shared"} argues that it
    does, at least 'to the extent that Bratman's' does. [Bratman (2015,
    75)]{.citation cites="bratman:2015_shareda"} objects to this claim
    on the grounds that '\[t\]he capacity to participate in the creation
    of \[\...\] plural commitments does \[\...\] go beyond capacities
    that are involved in individual agency.'

[^16]: Searle does not use the term 'we-intention', which was notably
    used by [Tuomela and Miller (1988)]{.citation
    cites="tuomela_we-intentions_1988"}. (Those authors credit [Sellars
    (1963)]{.citation cites="sellars:1963_imperatives"}, although he
    does not use exactly that term.) Following [Gilbert (2007,
    33)]{.citation cites="gilbert:2007_searle"}, it has become common to
    use this term in discussing Searle.

[^17]: [Linnebo (2022, sec. 5)]{.citation cites="linnebo:2022_plural"}
    identifies this as 'the traditional view in analytic philosophy'
    (which Linnebo does not endorse).

[^18]: I am grateful to an anonymous referee for suggesting this
    possibility.

[^19]: See, for example, [Tomasello and Carpenter (2007)]{.citation
    cites="Tomasello:2007gl"}, [Rakoczy and Tomasello (2007)]{.citation
    cites="Rakoczy:2007ou"}, [Moll and Tomasello (2007)]{.citation
    cites="Moll:2007gu"} and [Gräfenhain et al. (2009)]{.citation
    cites="Grafenhain:2010zl"}. Note that these researchers smoosh
    together incompatible philosophical theories when introducing
    notions of shared intention. The insights being applied are common
    to many theories and do not depend on the correctness of any one
    theory.

[^20]: For an illustration of how this might begin, see [Bratman (2014,
    chap. 6)]{.citation cites="bratman:2014_book"} who investigates how
    a reductive approach may enable the construction of plural and
    aggregate subjects.

[^21]: See [Gomez-Lavin and Rachar (2019)]{.citation
    cites="gomez-lavin:2019_normativity"}. Although their study is not
    directly concerned with shared intention, their approach may
    illuminate how their participants represent joint activities.
