::: {#title-block-header}
# Coordinating Joint Action  {#coordinating-joint-action .title}

Stephen A. Butterfill\
\<s.butterfill@warwick.ac.uk \>
:::

# Introduction {#sec:introduction}

It is often necessary that agents' actions are coordinated if they are
to successfully exercise shared (or 'collective') agency in acting
together. An eloping couple clink plastic beakers of cheap wine together
to toast their escape, sharing a smile of achievement; on the beach in
front of them a small group of roadies are putting up a marquee outside
for a concert later that evening while the musicians, having been made
to wait while the audio technicians replace a cable, playfully improvise
on stage. In cases like these, successfully exercising shared agency
involves coordinating actions precisely in space and time. Such precise
coordination is not, or not only, a matter of having intentions and
knowledge, whether individual or collective. Intentions and knowledge
states may play a role in long-term coordination---they may explain, for
instance, why the couple's both being on the beach tonight is no
accident. But they cannot explain how the precise coordination needed to
clink beakers or to share a smile is achieved. Given that is not only
intention or knowledge, what does enable two or more agents' actions to
be coordinated and so enables exercises of shared agency such as these?

Much psychological and neuroscientific research bears directly on this
question. This chapter introduces that research: it outlines some of the
key findings and describes a minimal theoretical framework, identifying
along the way issues likely to be of interest to researchers studying
collective intentionality.

# Joint Action {#sec:theoretical-framework}

Where philosophers tend to focus on notions such as intentional shared
agency, scientific research on coordination mechanisms is usually
interpreted in terms of a broader and simpler notion of joint action.
This is standardly defined by appeal to [Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich
(2006)]{.citation cites="Sebanz:2006yq"}'s working definition as:

> 'any form of social interaction whereby two or more individuals
> coordinate their actions in space and time to bring about a change in
> the environment' ([(Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich 2006,
> 70)]{.citation cites="Sebanz:2006yq"}).

Although widely used, this working definition has some drawbacks. It
requires that joint actions should be 'social interactions', thereby
raising tricky issues about which interactions are social. The working
definition also appears to require that coordinating their actions is
something the individuals involved in joint action do, perhaps even
requiring that this is done with the end of bringing about a change. As
we will see, there are reasons to consider the possibility actions can
be coordinated without both (or even either) requirements being met. We
can avoid the drawbacks while remaining true to the implicit conception
underlying scientific research with a simpler and extremely broad
definition:

> A *joint action* is an event grounded [^1] by two or more agents'
> actions.

This definition of joint action, like [Sebanz, Bekkering, and Knoblich
(2006)]{.citation cites="Sebanz:2006yq"}'s working definition, is
neutral on representations and processes. So when two people swing their
arms in synchrony, the event of them swinging their arms is a joint
action. Likewise, if fish are agents then the movements of a shoal are
joint actions. [^2]

How does research on coordination in joint action bear on the question
about shared agency? Not all joint actions involve exercising shared
agency, but some or all exercises of shared agency are, or involve,
joint actions. It is reasonable to conjecture that what enables the
actions of agents exercising collective agency to be precisely
coordinated are mechanisms of coordination common to many different
forms of joint action. To illustrate, consider entrainment.

# Entrainment {#sec:entrainment}

Entrainment, the process of synchronizing two or more rhythmic
behaviours with respect to phase, is a feature of everyday life. People
walking side by side may fall into the same walking patterns [(Ulzen et
al. 2008; Nessler and Gilliland 2009)]{.citation
cites="vanulzen:2008_characteristics nessler:2009_interpersonal"},
conversation partners sometimes synchronize their body sway [(Shockley,
Santana, and Fowler 2003)]{.citation cites="shockley:2003_mutual"} and
gaze [(D. C. Richardson, Dale, and Kirkham 2007)]{.citation
cites="richardson:2007_art"}, clusters of male fiddler crabs wave their
claws synchronously to attract mates [(Backwell et al. 1998; Merker,
Madison, and Eckerdal 2009)]{.citation
cites="backwell:1998_synchronized merker:2009_role"}, and an audience
will sometimes briefly synchronise its clapping [(Néda et al.
2000)]{.citation cites="neda:2000_self"}.

As these examples suggest, entrainment enables the coordination of a
wide range of joint actions, not all of which involve shared agency. In
fact interpersonal entrainment is sometimes treated as a special case of
a process by which sequences of actions can be synchronised with
sequences of environmental stimuli such as a metronome [(e.g. Repp and
Su 2013; Konvalinka et al. 2010)]{.citation
cites="repp:2013_sensorimotor konvalinka:2010_follow"}, and, more
boldly, sometimes even as just one instance of what happens when
oscillators are coupled [(e.g. Shockley, Richardson, and Dale 2009,
314)]{.citation cites="shockley:2009_conversation"}.

Which exercises of shared agency might entrainment enable? Entrainment
allows for extremely precise coordination of movements [(Repp
2000)]{.citation cites="repp:2000_compensation"} and is probably
essential for joint actions involving rhythmic music, dance, drill, and
some martial arts.

How is entrainment related to agents' intentions concerning coordination
or the lack thereof? Entrainment of two or more agents' actions can
occur without any intention concerning coordination [(e.g. Varlet et al.
2015)]{.citation cites="varlet:2015_informational"}, and without the
agents being aware of the coordination of their actions [(Michael J.
Richardson, Marsh, and Schmidt 2005)]{.citation
cites="richardson:2005_effects"}. Further, although subjects can
sometimes intentionally prevent entrainment, entrainment and related
forms of coordination do sometimes occur even despite individuals
attempting not to coordinate their actions [(e.g. Ulzen et al. 2008;
Issartel, Marin, and Cadopi 2007)]{.citation
cites="vanulzen:2008_characteristics issartel:2007_unintended"}. So
whether two agents' actions become entrained is not always, and perhaps
not typically, something which they do or could control.

But entrainment is not always independent of agents' intentions [(Miles
et al. 2010; Nessler and Gilliland 2009)]{.citation
cites="miles:2010_too nessler:2009_interpersonal"}. Because no one can
perform two actions without introducing some tiny variation between
them, entrainment of any kind depends on continuous monitoring and
ongoing adjustments [(Repp 2005, 976)]{.citation
cites="repp:2005_sensorimotor"}. One kind of adjustment is a phase
shift, which occurs when one action in a sequence is delayed or brought
forwards in time. Another kind of adjustment is a period shift; that is,
an increase or reduction in the speed with which all future actions are
performed, or in the delay between all future adjacent pairs of actions.
These two kinds of adjustment, phase shifts and period shifts, appear to
be made by mechanisms acting independently, so that correcting errors
involves a distinctive pattern of overadjustment. [^3] [Repp (2005,
987)]{.citation cites="repp:2005_sensorimotor"} argues, further, that
while adjustments involving phase shifts are largely automatic,
adjustments involving changes in frequency are to some extent
controlled. This may be key to understanding the influence of intention
on entrainment. One way or another (contrast [Fairhurst, Janata, and
Keller (2013, 2599)]{.citation cites="fairhurst:2013_being"} with [Repp
and Keller (2008)]{.citation cites="repp:2008_sensorimotor"}'s
'coordinative strategies' proposal), intentions play a role in frequency
adjustments and thereby influence how tightly agents synchronise their
actions.

Entrainment is clearly necessary for coordination in many joint actions
requiring precise synchronisation such as those involving rhythmic music
or dance. Entrainment may also be important in ways as yet barely
understood for a much wider range of joint actions in which such precise
synchronisation initially appears unnecessary. [^4] But there must be
more to coordinating joint actions than entrainment. After all
entrainment depends on repetition whereas many joint actions are one-off
events, as when the a couple clink plastic beakers. Which forms of
coordination enable one-off joint actions?

# Motor Simulation {#sec:co-representation}

Many one-off joint actions---those which do not depend on repetition or
rhythm---require precise coordination. In clinking beakers, swinging a
toddler between our arms, and executing a pass in football, the window
for success may be fractions of a second in duration and but millimetres
wide. One way---perhaps the only way---of achieving such precise
coordination depends on the existence of a phenomenon often called
'motor simulation' or 'mirroring'. What is this?

To understand motor simulation it is necessary first to get a rough fix
on the idea that motor processes and representations are involved in
performing ordinary, individual actions. Preparing for, and performing,
bodily actions involves not only intentions and practical reasoning but
also motor representations and processes. To illustrate, consider a cook
who has grasped an egg between her finger and thumb and is now lifting
it from the egg box. She will typically grip the egg just tightly enough
to secure it. But how tightly she needs to grip it depends in part, of
course, on the forces to which she will subject the egg in lifting it.
The fact that she grips eggs just tightly enough throughout such action
sequences which vary in how she lifts the egg implies that how tightly
she grips the egg depends on the path along which she will lift it. This
in turn indicates (along with much other evidence) that information
about her anticipated future hand and arm movements appropriately
influences how tightly the cook initially grips the egg [(Kawato
1999)]{.citation cites="kawato:1999_internal"}. This fine-grained,
anticipatory control of grasp, like many other features of action
performance ([(see Rosenbaum 2009, chap. 1)]{.citation
cites="rosenbaum:2010_human"} for more examples), is not plausibly a
consequence of mindless physiology, nor of intention and practical
reasoning. The processes and representations it depends on are motoric.

Motor processes and representations lead a double life: they occur not
only in performing actions but also observing them. For instance, in
someone observing the cook gripping and lifting the egg, there may be
motor processes and representations related to those which would occur
in her if she, the observer, were performing this action herself. One
dramatic piece of evidence for this claim comes from a study in which
activity in an observer's motor cortex was artificially boosted with
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). This caused minute patterns of
activation (specifically, motor-evoked potentials) to occur in a muscle
of the observer at just the times the agent being observed used the
corresponding muscle. [^5] As this illustrates, motor processes in an
observer can carry detailed information about the timing of components
of actions. *Motor simulation* is the occurrence of motor processes and
representations in an observer concerning an action which she is
observing or imagining and which are driven by observing or imagining
that action.

Motor simulation enables observers to anticipate how others' actions
will unfold and the likely outcomes the actions will achieve [(Wolpert,
Doya, and Kawato 2003; Wilson and Knoblich 2005)]{.citation
cites="Wolpert:2003mg Wilson:2005qu"}. Such anticipation is reflected
both in explicit judgements [(e.g. Aglioti et al. 2008)]{.citation
cites="aglioti_action_2008"} and in spontaneous eye movements [(e.g.
Flanagan and Johansson 2003; Rotman et al. 2006; Costantini et al. 2014;
Ambrosini, Costantini, and Sinigaglia 2011)]{.citation
cites="Flanagan:2003lm Rotman:2006xf Costantini:2012fk ambrosini:2011_grasping"}.

How does any of this bear on the coordination of joint action? If motor
simulation is to play a role in coordinating joint actions, agents must
be capable of using anticipation based on motor simulation in preparing
and performing actions different from those simulated. Accordingly,
[Kourtis, Sebanz, and Knoblich (2013)]{.citation
cites="kourtis:2012_predictive"} used neural markers of motor activity
to show that motor simulation can occur in joint action even where
agents are performing different actions in close succession. To
investigate, further, whether motor simulation in joint action can
facilitate coordination, [Vesper et al. (2013)]{.citation
cites="vesper:2012_jumping"} instructed pairs of people to jump and land
at the same time. They found evidence that in some subjects there was a
motor simulation of her partner's jump which influences how she herself
jumps and so enables precise coordination in landing together. This is
one example of how motor simulation may enable coordination in joint
action. [^6]

Reflecting on entrainment and coordination driven by motor simulation,
it is striking that one-off motor simulation allows greater flexibility
at the cost of some precision. Is there a more general trade-off between
flexibility and precision in mechanisms underpinning coordination? If
so, what might this tell us about the nature of mechanisms underpinning
coordination for joint action and their relations to each other?

# Flexibility vs Precision {#sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff}

Consider two ways of partially ordering mechanisms underpinning
coordination. The first is precision: How precise, in space and time, is
the coordination they underpin in the best cases? For instance,
mechanisms underpinning entrainment enable expert musicians to
coordinate their actions to within tens of milliseconds, whereas one-off
motor simulation permits coordination of actions to within larger
fractions of a second. A second partial ordering is flexibility: How
wide is the range of situations in which this mechanism can underpin
coordination? For instance, motor simulation can underpin coordination
whether or not repetition or rhythm is involved, unlike entrainment.
Thinking just about motor simulation and mechanisms underpinning
entrainment, there appears to be a trade-off between precision and
flexibility. This appears to generalise to other forms of coordination
too, such as forms of coordination driven by shared intention. Gains in
flexibility seem to come at the cost of precision.

Why? Before attempting to answer this question, it is useful to fix
terminology with some stipulations. A *goal* of an action or behaviour
is an outcome to which it is directed. Relative to a particular action
or behaviour, goals can be partially ordered by the means-end relation.
In saying that one goal is more *abstract* than another relative to a
behaviour or action, I shall mean that the latter is linked to the
former by a chain of outcomes ordered as means to ends. A *goal-state*
is a mental state (or a structure of mental states) which represents, or
otherwise specifies, an outcome and is the kind of thing in virtue of
which some actions or behaviours can be directed to certain outcomes.
Given that intentions are mental states, they are paradigmatic
goal-states. But intentions are not the only goal-states: as we saw in
[4](#sec:co-representation){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:co-representation"}, some motor representations are also
goal-states. [^7]

So why might flexibility in a mechanism underpinning coordination come
at the cost of precision? One possibility involves two conjectures.
First, achieving flexibility generally depends on representing goals,
and the more abstract the goals that can be represented, the greater the
flexibility. To illustrate, entrainment can occur without any
representations of goals at all, whereas motor simulation involves motor
representations which are goal-states. But relative to intentions or
knowledge states, motor representations are limited with respect to how
abstract the outcomes they can specify are. Motor representations can
specify outcomes such as grasping or transporting a fragile object, and
even sequences of such outcomes [(see, e.g., Fogassi et al.
2005)]{.citation cites="Fogassi:2005nf"}. But they cannot specify
outcomes such as selecting an organic egg or testing for freshness:
motor processes and representations are mostly blind to things so
distantly related to bodily action. A further conjecture is that
processes involving more abstract goal representations typically (but
not necessarily always) place greater demands on cognitive resources,
which typically (but not necessarily always) results in lower precision.
This conjecture is suggested by an analogy with the physiological.
Because physiological processes are a source of variability,
coordinating with a given degree of precision should get harder as the
duration and complexity of the actions to be coordinated increases.
Given that cognitive processes, like physiological processes, are a
source of variability, increasing cognitive demands by relying on
representations of more abstract goals should likewise increase
variability and so limit precision.

In short, flexibility may come at the cost of precision because
increasing flexibility requires representations of more abstract goals,
which impose greater cognitive demands and thereby increase variability,
so reducing how precise the coordination underpinned by a mechanism can
be in the best cases. This may be why forms of coordination such as
entrainment and motor representation can occur independently of, and
even contrary to, intentions concerning coordination: precision requires
such independence.

Thinking about trading precision for flexibility suggests that there is
a gap in the forms of coordination so far considered. To see why,
consider the situation of a couple alone on a beach. Having filled
plastic beakers with wine, they spontaneously and fluidly clink them
together in a toast without spilling a drop of wine. To explain how they
are able to coordinate so precisely we cannot appeal to motor simulation
alone; but it would be no less plausible to appeal only to practical
deliberation involving intentions or other propositional attitudes. We
need something more flexible than motor simulation and more precise than
practical deliberation.

# Task Co-representation {#sec:task-co-repr-1}

Consider individual agents acting alone for a moment. A *task
representation* links an event to an outcome in such a way that,
normally, the event's actual or expected occurrence would trigger motor
preparation for actions that should realise the outcome. Why do we need
task representations? Imagine yourself cycling up to a crossroad. Even
if you are concentrating hard on dodging potholes without being hit by
the rapidly approaching car behind you (will it slow down or should you
risk going through this hole?), it is likely---hopefully---that the
traffic light's turning red will cause you to brake. The connection
between red light events and braking actions need not require
intentional control, thanks to task representations.

How is task representation relevant to coordinating joint actions? Let
us say that two individuals have a *task co-representation* if there is
a task concerning which each has a task representation. [^8] [Sebanz,
Bekkering, and Knoblich (2006)]{.citation cites="Sebanz:2006yq"} argue
that the agents of a joint action can have a task co-representation
concerning a task which only one of them is actually supposed to
perform. This, they suggest, would enable agents to exploit motor
simulation prior to, and independently of, observing the any actual
actions. Thus task co-representation could in principle greatly extend
the range of situations in which motor simulation could underpin
coordination in joint action. To illustrate, consider again the couple
on the beach filling beakers with wine and then clinking them together.
As noted earlier (in
[5](#sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff"}), their doing this
spontaneously, fluidly and with precision could not be explained by
motor simulation alone when neither of them plays the role of leader.
But it could be explained by Sebanz et al's proposal about task
co-representation. If the couple expect to clink beakers after the wine
is poured and have task co-representations concerning each's task in the
clinking, then they will be able to use motor simulation to anticipate
each other's actions in advance of starting to act. This is one
illustration of how task co-representation might underpin coordination
for one-off joint actions where agents have to respond to events in ways
they have never done before.

The task co-representation hypothesis---agents involved in a joint
action can have a task co-representation concerning a task that only one
of them is supposed to perform---generates a variety of predictions. It
predicts interference and facilitation effects: when acting together
with another, your performance of your task will be affected by facts
about which task the other is performing, and your performance will be
impaired or enhanced in ways analogous to those in which it would be
affected if you were performing both tasks alone. This prediction has
been confirmed for a variety of tasks [(Sebanz, Knoblich, and Prinz
2005; Atmaca, Sebanz, and Knoblich 2011; Böckler, Knoblich, and Sebanz
2012; Wel and Fu 2015)]{.citation
cites="Sebanz:2005fk atmaca:2011_joint bockler:2012_effects wel:2015_entrainment"}.
The task co-representation hypothesis also predicts that, in some
situations when you are acting with another, events linked to the
other's task will trigger some preparation (but not necessarily full
preparation) in you for a task which is actually supposed to be
performed by the other. Evidence in support of this prediction includes
signs that agents of a joint action sometimes inhibit tendencies to act
when another, rather than she herself, is supposed act [(Sebanz et al.
2006; C.-C. Tsai et al. 2008)]{.citation
cites="sebanz:2006_twin_peaks tsai:2008_action"}, as well as signs that
agents of a joint action are sometimes preparing for, or even covertly
performing, actions that another is supposed to perform [(e.g. Kourtis,
Sebanz, and Knoblich 2013; Baus et al. 2014)]{.citation
cites="kourtis:2012_predictive baus:2014_predicting"}. [^9]

Task co-representation is valuable in coordinating joint actions at
least in part because it is more flexible than bare motor simulation
while also more precise than practical reasoning. But there is a limit
to what can be explained with either motor simulation or task
co-representation, at least as we have conceived of them so far. Suppose
motor simulation (whether or not triggered by a task co-representation)
enables agents of a joint action to anticipate each other's actions. How
could these anticipations inform preparation for their own actions, and,
in particular, how could they do so without requiring cognitive
processes inimical to precision? To offer even a candidate answer to
this question requires going beyond motor simulation and task
co-representation as we have so far conceived them.

# Emergent vs Planned Coordination {#sec:emergent-vs-planned}

In thinking about coordination for joint action it is useful to have
plural counterparts of the notions of goal and goal-state introduced
earlier (in [4](#sec:co-representation){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:co-representation"}). To say of an outcome that it is a
*collective goal* of some actions or behaviours is to say that they are
collectively directed to this outcome---that is, they are directed to
this outcome and their being so directed is not, or not only, a matter
of each action or behaviour being individually directed to that outcome.
This is a broad notion: raising a brood can be a collective goal of some
eusocial insects' behaviours, [^10] and repairing a broken fence can be
a collective goal of some neighbours' actions. A *collective goal-state*
is a mental state or, more likely, a structure of mental states, which
specifies an outcome and is the kind of thing in virtue of which some
pluralities of actions or behaviours can be collectively directed to
certain outcomes. Bratman's account of shared intention aims to describe
one kind of collective goal-state [(Bratman 1993)]{.citation
cites="Bratman:1993je"}.

Following [Knoblich, Butterfill, and Sebanz (2011)]{.citation
cites="Knoblich:2010fk"}, we can distinguish between emergent and
planned coordination. *Planned coordination* is coordination driven by a
collective goal-state, [^11] whereas *emergent coordination* is
coordination not so driven. Planned coordination is familiar from
philosophical discussions of shared intention, one of the functions of
which is to coordinate agents' actions [(Bratman 1993, 99)]{.citation
cites="Bratman:1993je"}. By contrast, all the forms of coordination
discussed in this chapter so far---entrainment as well as coordination
driven by action and task co-representations---are naturally thought of
as forms of emergent coordination insofar as it seems they could occur
independently of the agents having any collective goal-state. [^12] But
there is also a growing body of evidence about the existence of planned
coordination for joint action.

# Collective Goal-States {#sec:collective-goal-states}

Two pianists are producing tones in the course of playing a duet.
Consider one of the pianists. There is an outcome to which her action is
directed, the production of a tone or melody; and there is an outcome to
which her and her partner's actions are collectively directed, the
production of a combination of pitches or harmony. Do dueting pianists
represent collective goals, that is, outcomes to which their actions are
collectively directed?

One way to investigate this question involves covertly introducing
errors. [Janeen D. Loehr et al. (2013)]{.citation
cites="loehr:2013_monitoring"} contrasted two kinds of error: those
which were errors relative to the goal of an individual pianist's
actions (the pitch) but not relative to the collective goal of the two
pianists' actions (the harmony); and those which were errors relative to
both. They found neural signatures for both kinds of errors in expert
pianists. This is evidence that dueting pianists do indeed represent
collective goals. A further study indicates that these collective goals
are represented motorically [(Janeen D. Loehr and Vesper
2015)]{.citation cites="loehr:2015_sound"}. [^13]

How might motor representations of collective goals underpin
coordination for joint action? One possible answer is suggested by
[Gallotti and Frith (2013)]{.citation cites="gallotti:2013_social"} who
propose that a 'we-mode' is required. They explain:

> 'The central idea of the we-mode is that interacting agents share
> their minds by representing their contributions to the joint action as
> contributions to something that they are going to pursue together, as
> a 'we'. \[...\] To represent things in the we-mode is for interacting
> individuals to have the content of their individual actions specified
> by representing aspects of the interactive scene in a distinct
> psychological attitude of intending-together, believing-together,
> desiring-together, etc' [(Gallotti and Frith 2013, 163)]{.citation
> cites="gallotti:2013_social"}.

An alternative possible answer is suggested by what [Vesper et al.
(2010)]{.citation cites="vesper_minimal_2010"} call a 'minimal
architecture for joint action'. They propose to start by attempting to
characterise joint action and its coordination without postulating
distinct psychological attitudes and without invoking representations of
interacting agents as comprising a 'we'. Instead their proposal is that
some or all of the representations underpinning coordination for joint
action are ordinary motor representations, task representations and
other representations that are also involved in the coordination of
ordinary, individual action. Relatedly, in at least some cases,
coordination is driven by representations which are *agent-neutral*,
that is, which do not specify any particular agent or agent. This
proposal is consistent with theories about the roles of motor simulation
and task co-representation in coordinating joint action (see
[4](#sec:co-representation){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:co-representation"} and
[6](#sec:task-co-repr-1){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:task-co-repr-1"}): anticipating another's actions and
their effects appears to involve much the same agent-neutral motor and
task representations which would be involved if one were actually
performing those actions oneself. Of course, motor and task
representations concerning actions others will eventually perform must
ultimately have effects different from those concerning actions the
agent will perform; but this is necessary for both observation and joint
action and need not involve a novel kind of attitude.

But how, given [Vesper et al. (2010)]{.citation
cites="vesper_minimal_2010"}'s 'minimal architecture' proposal, could
motor representations of collective goals underpin coordination for
joint action? In each agent of a joint action, the motor representations
of collective goals trigger preparation for action in just the way any
motor representations do. This has the effect that each agent is
preparing to perform all of the actions comprising a joint action,
although not necessarily in much detail [(compare Janeen D. Loehr and
Vesper 2015)]{.citation cites="loehr:2015_sound"}. Now this may appear
wasteful given that each agent will only perform a subset of the actions
prepared for. But it is not. One agent's preparing (to some extent) to
perform all of the actions that will comprise a joint action ensures
that the resulting motor plan for her actions will be constrained by her
motor plan for the others' actions. And, given that she is sufficiently
similar to the others and that the possibilities for action are
sufficiently constrained in their situation, her motor plan for the
others' actions will reliably match their motor plans for their actions.
So one agent's preparing to perform all of the actions has the effect
that her motor plan for her actions is indirectly constrained by the
others' motor plans for their actions. In this way, motor
representations of collective goals could in principle underpin
coordination for joint action by enabling agents to meet relational
constraints on their actions [(see further Butterfill 2016)]{.citation
cites="butterfill:2015_planning"}.

The conjecture that motor representations of collective goals underpin
coordination for joint action provides one response to a question raised
at the end of [6](#sec:task-co-repr-1){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:task-co-repr-1"}. The question was how anticipations
concerning another's actions arising from motor simulation (whether bare
motor simulation or occurring as a consequence of task
co-representation) feed into preparing and monitoring your own actions.
When coordination depends on motor representations of collective goals,
the presupposition this question makes is incorrect. There are not two
processes but one. Anticipation of another's actions and preparation for
your own are not two separate things. They are parts of a single process
in the same sense that, in preparing to perform a bimanual action,
preparation for the actions to be performed by the left hand and
anticipation of the movements of the right hand are parts of a single
process. So where motor simulation and task co-representation involve
collective goals to which a joint action is directed, motor processes
themselves can ensure the integration of anticipations concerning
another's actions with preparation for your own.

This is not quite the end of the story about collective goals. Research
on perceiving joint affordances points to a second way in which motor
representations of collective goals may underpin coordination in joint
action.

# Joint Affordances {#sec:joint-affordances}

A *joint affordance* is an affordance for the agents of a joint action
collectively---that is, it is an affordance for these agents and this is
not, or not only, a matter of its being an affordance for any of the
individual agents. Perceiving (or otherwise detecting) joint affordances
is critical for many mundane joint actions such as appropriately
gripping objects and applying the right force in moving them together,
and crossing a busy road while holding hands. It is possible that motor
representations of collective goals enable the agents of some joint
actions to perceive joint affordances, or so I will suggest in this
section. [^14] But first, what grounds are there for supposing that
joint affordances even exist?

[Doerrfeld, Sebanz, and Shiffrar (2012, 474)]{.citation
cites="doerrfeld:2012_expecting"} argue that 'the joint action abilities
of a group shape the individual perception of its members.' In their
experiment, perceptual judgements of weight were affected by whether the
perceiver was about to lift the box alone or with another. Others have
investigated different situations in which performing actions
independently or as part of a joint action can affect how you perceive
affordances. For instance, consider two individuals walking through a
doorway. How wide must the doorway be for them to walk though it without
rotating their shoulders? [Davis et al. (2010, Experiment 1)]{.citation
cites="davis:2010_perceiving"} show that the answer cannot be obtained
simply by adding the minimum widths for each individual, and (in
Experiments 2--4) that people can perceive whether doorway-like openings
will allow a particular pair of walkers to pass through comfortably.
[^15] Importantly, people can perceive joint affordances for walkers not
only when they are one of those walking but also when they are merely
observing others walking together [(Davis et al. 2010, Experiment
4)]{.citation cites="davis:2010_perceiving"}. This suggests that the
perceptual capacity does not depend on the perceiver's own current
possibilities for action. So what makes perception of joint affordances
possible?

Consider the conjecture that joint affordances are perceived as a
consequence of motor simulation (this is one of two possibilities
discussed by [(Doerrfeld, Sebanz, and Shiffrar 2012)]{.citation
cites="doerrfeld:2012_expecting"}). This conjecture is made plausible by
independent evidence for two hypotheses. First, motor representations
can modulate perceptual experience; for instance, how an event is
represented motorically can affect how a pair of tones are perceived
with respect to pitch ([(Repp and Knoblich 2007, 2009)]{.citation
cites="repp:2007_action repp:2009_performed"}; for discussion, see
[(Sinigaglia and Butterfill 2015)]{.citation
cites="sinigaglia:2015_puzzle"}). Second, perceiving another's
affordance involves motor activity [(Cardellicchio, Sinigaglia, and
Costantini 2012)]{.citation cites="cardellicchio:2012_grasping"}. These
two findings make it plausible that, in general, perceiving some
affordances is facilitated or even enabled by motor simulation. The
findings just discussed suggest that the same may be true for joint
affordances, that is, affordances for agents involved in one or another
kind of joint action. But of course this is possible only given that
there are motor representations of collective goals. After all,
perceiving joint affordances requires motor simulation concerning the
joint action, which would be triggered by a motor representation of a
collective goal of the actions grounding the joint action; merely having
separate motor simulations of each agent's actions could not underpin
the identification of a joint affordance. This is why motor
representations of collective goals may facilitate coordination in joint
actions not only by enabling the agents to meet relational constraints
on their actions (see
[8](#sec:collective-goal-states){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:collective-goal-states"}) but also by enabling them to
perceive joint affordances.

# Conclusion {#sec:conclusion}

What forms of coordination for joint action enable humans to exercise
shared agency in doing things such as clinking beakers, sharing smiles,
erecting marquees, or producing rhythmic music? We have seen that there
is much diversity. Coordination for joint action includes not only
emergent varieties such as entrainment (see
[3](#sec:entrainment){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:entrainment"}) as well as the forms underpinned by motor
simulation (see [4](#sec:co-representation){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:co-representation"}) and task co-representation (see
[6](#sec:task-co-repr-1){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:task-co-repr-1"}), but also planned coordination
underpinned by motor representations of collective goals (see
[8](#sec:collective-goal-states){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:collective-goal-states"}). [^16]

This diversity in forms of coordination may exist in part because of a
trade-off between flexibility and precision for individual mechanisms
underpinning coordination (see
[5](#sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff"}). Having multiple
mechanisms is useful partly because each makes a different trade-off
between flexibility and precision.

Many exercises of shared agency appear to require both flexibility and
extremely precise coordination. Improvising musicians ideally achieve
temporal synchrony without becoming enslaved to a rhythm. How is this
possible? Exercises of shared agency can depend on multiple forms of
coordination, of course. Individual mechanisms underpinning coordination
may be constrained by the precision--flexibility trade-off, but this
constraint does not apply to a diversity of mechanisms considered in
aggregate. So there is no theoretical obstacle to relying on highly
flexible mechanisms yet achieving extremely precise coordination. This
requires only that diverse mechanisms can have synergistic effects on
coordination.

Just here we encounter the *synergy challenge*. Achieving precise
coordination in space and time probably demands that mechanisms
underpinning different forms of coordination are to a significant degree
independent of each other (see
[5](#sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:flexibility-precision-tradeoff"}). Yet acting flexibility
requires that the different mechanisms sometimes nonaccidentally operate
synergistically---the shared intention, the task co-representation, and
the motor representation of the collective goal cannot all be pulling in
different directions. The challenge is to understand how, in some
situations, mechanisms underpinning different forms of coordination and
which are driven by largely independent representational structures can
nevertheless nonaccidentally have synergistic effects. Meeting this
challenge may require attention to differences between novices and
experts, to why practice is sometimes necessary, to the effects of
common knowledge on moment-by-moment coordination (see, for example,
[(D. C. Richardson, Dale, and Kirkham 2007)]{.citation
cites="richardson:2007_art"}), and to phenomenal aspects of coordination
(as [(Keller, Novembre, and Hove 2014)]{.citation
cites="keller:2014_rhythm"} hint), among other things. The synergy
challenge is currently a significant obstacle to progress is
understanding how high degrees of flexibility and precision can be
combined in the coordination of joint actions.

Another issue likely to demand future research concerns which, if any,
forms of coordination require postulating novel kinds of representations
or processes specific to shared agency (see
[8](#sec:collective-goal-states){reference-type="ref+label"
reference="sec:collective-goal-states"}). Although scientists sometimes
adopt terms from philosophical discussions of collective intentionality
such as 'shared' and 'we-' representations, the discoveries about the
representations and processes underpinning coordination reviewed in this
chapter do not require representations to be shared other than in the
sense in which barrel organ aficionados share a taste in music.

One theme in this chapter was that much coordination of joint action
appears to involve not fully distinguishing others' actions from your
own. Take motor simulation, task co-representation and motor
representation of collective goals. In each case, coordination involves
motor or task representations of actions, tasks or goals that relate
primarily to another's part in the joint action. This is not a matter of
representing another's goals or plans as an observer: it is a matter of
preparing actions and representing tasks she will perform in ways that
would also be appropriate if it were you, not her, who was about to
perform them. To a limited but significant extent, then, coordination
involves representing both another's actions and your own in ways that
give them equal status as parts of a single activity. The existence of
such a perspective on the actions grounding a joint action might just
turn out to matter not only for coordination but also for other aspects
of collective intentionality such as commitment and cooperation. [^17]

::: refcontext
:::

[^1]: Events [*D*~1~]{.math .inline}, \... [*D*~*n*~]{.math .inline}
    *ground* [*E*]{.math .inline} just if: [*D*~1~]{.math .inline},
    \... [*D*~*n*~]{.math .inline} and [*E*]{.math .inline} occur;
    [*D*~1~]{.math .inline}, \... [*D*~*n*~]{.math .inline} are each
    part of [*E*]{.math .inline}; and every event that is a part of
    [*E*]{.math .inline} but does not overlap [*D*~1~]{.math .inline},
    \... [*D*~*n*~]{.math .inline} is caused by some or all of
    [*D*~1~]{.math .inline}, \... [*D*~*n*~]{.math .inline}. (This is a
    generalisation of the notion specified by [(Pietroski
    1998)]{.citation cites="pietroski_actions_1998"}.)

[^2]: Note that what follows is neutral on whether joint actions are
    actions. As a terminological stipulation, I shall say that an
    individual is an *agent of a joint action* just if she is an agent
    of an action which, together with some other events, grounds this
    joint action. (Depending on your views about events, causation and
    agents, getting some edge cases right may require adding that for
    this individual to be an agent of this joint action, this particular
    plurality of grounding events---her action and the other
    events---must include actions with agents other than her.)

[^3]: See [Schulze, Cordes, and Vorberg (2005, 474--76)]{.citation
    cites="schulze:2005_keeping"}. [Keller, Novembre, and Hove
    (2014)]{.citation cites="keller:2014_rhythm"} suggest, further, that
    the two kinds of adjustment involve different brain networks. Note
    that this view is currently controversial: [Janeen D. Loehr and
    Palmer (2011)]{.citation cites="loehr:2011_temporal"} could be
    interpreted as providing evidence for a different account of how
    entrainment is maintained.

[^4]: See, for example, [D. C. Richardson and Dale (2005)]{.citation
    cites="richardson_looking_2005"}. For relatively speculative
    discussions, see [D. Richardson, Schockley, and Kevin (2008; Merker,
    Madison, and Eckerdal 2009; Keller, Novembre, and Hove 2014, sec.
    4)]{.citation
    cites="richardson:2008_synchrony merker:2009_role keller:2014_rhythm"}.

[^5]: [Gangitano, Mottaghy, and Pascual-Leone (2001)]{.citation
    cites="Gangitano:2001ft"}; see further [Fadiga, Craighero, and
    Olivier (2005; Ambrosini, Sinigaglia, and Costantini
    2012)]{.citation cites="Fadiga:2005gq ambrosini:2012_tie"}. For a
    review of evidence that, when observing an action, motor processes
    and representations occur in the observer like those which would
    occur if she were performing an action of the kind observed rather
    than merely observing it, see [Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia
    (2010)]{.citation cites="rizzolatti_functional_2010"}.

[^6]: For evidence that motor simulation also enables coordination in
    musical performances, see [Keller, Knoblich, and Repp (2007; Janeen
    D. Loehr and Palmer 2011; Novembre et al. 2014)]{.citation
    cites="keller:2007_pianists loehr:2011_temporal novembre:2013_motor"}.
    []{#fn:pianist-motor data-label="fn:pianist-motor"} For evidence on
    development, see [Meyer et al. (2011)]{.citation
    cites="meyer:2011_joint"}'s investigation of motor processes and
    coordination in three-year-old children.

[^7]: For more detailed arguments that some motor representations are
    goal-states, see [Prinz (1997, 143--46)]{.citation
    cites="prinz:1997_perception"}, [Pacherie (2008)]{.citation
    cites="pacherie:2008_action"} and [Butterfill and Sinigaglia
    (2014)]{.citation cites="butterfill:2012_intention"}.

[^8]: This definition needs refining in various ways not directly
    relevant to the present discussion.

[^9]: [Wenke et al. (2011)]{.citation cites="wenke:2011_what"} and [Dolk
    et al. (2011, 2014)]{.citation
    cites="dolk:2011_how dolk:2014_joint"} have defended hypotheses
    which, if true, would enable some of the evidence for these
    predictions to be explained without accepting the task
    co-representation hypothesis.

[^10]: The insects' behaviours cannot be regarded as directed to raising
    a brood just in virtue of each individual insect behaviour being so
    directed because there is (typically, at least) a division of
    labour.

[^11]: Note that, despite the name, planned coordination does not by
    definition involve planning.

[^12]: Some forms of entrainment are probably a hybrid of emergent and
    planned coordination since, as we saw in
    [3](#sec:entrainment){reference-type="ref+label"
    reference="sec:entrainment"}, the precision with which entrained
    actions are synchronised can be influenced by the agents' intentions
    concerning coordination and therefore probably also by collective
    goal-states.

[^13]: Further evidence for motor representations of collective goals is
    provided by [J. C.-C. Tsai, Sebanz, and Knoblich (2011; Ramenzoni,
    Sebanz, and Knoblich 2014; Ménoret et al. 2014)]{.citation
    cites="tsai:2011_groop_effect ramenzoni:2014_scaling Menoret:2013fk"}
    and [Meyer, Wel, and Hunnius (2013)]{.citation
    cites="meyer:2013_higher-order"}.

[^14]: The notion of a collective goal was introduced in
    [7](#sec:emergent-vs-planned){reference-type="ref+label"
    reference="sec:emergent-vs-planned"}; evidence for the existence of
    motor representations of collective goals was discussed in
    [8](#sec:collective-goal-states){reference-type="ref+label"
    reference="sec:collective-goal-states"}.

[^15]: See [Michael J. Richardson, Marsh, and Baron (2007)]{.citation
    cites="richardson_judging_2007"} for a further study involving
    jointly lifting planks.

[^16]: This is not a comprehensive list. Relevant reviews include
    [Knoblich, Butterfill, and Sebanz (2011; Keller, Novembre, and Hove
    2014; Marsh, Richardson, and Schmidt 2009)]{.citation
    cites="Knoblich:2010fk keller:2014_rhythm marsh_social_2009"}.

[^17]: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. I have benefitted immeasurably from extended
    collaborations with Natalie Sebanz, Guenther Knoblich and Corrado
    Sinigaglia as well as from shorter (so far) collaborations with
    Cordula Vesper and Lincoln Colling. I am also indebted to many
    people for discussion. Thank you!

    BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE. Stephen Butterfill researches and teaches on
    joint action, mindreading and other philosophical issues in
    cognitive science at the University of Warwick (UK).
