**Joint Action and Development**

**Abstract**

Given the premise that joint action plays some role in explaining how
humans come to understand minds, what could joint action be? Not what a
leading account, Michael Bratman's, says it is. For on that account
engaging in joint action involves sharing intentions and sharing
intentions requires much of the understanding of minds whose development
is supposed to be explained by appeal to joint action. This paper
therefore offers an account of a different kind of joint action, an
account compatible with the premise about development. The new account
is no replacement for the leading account; rather the accounts
characterise two kinds of joint action. Where the kind of joint
characterised by the leading account involves shared intentions, the new
account characterises a kind of joint action involving shared goals.

KEYWORDS: Joint action, shared intention, plural activity, cognitive
development, action

WORD COUNT: 9600 (plus 1200 words in reference list)

**1. The question**

On the assumption that joint action plays some role in explaining how
humans develop an understanding of minds, what could joint action be?
This question needs a little background. It is quite widely agreed that
human adults' reflections on thoughts and actions, their own and
others', involve a range of commonsense psychological concepts including
belief, desire, intention, knowledge and perception. Children's
abilities to deploy these concepts improve in fluency and sophistication
over more than three years ([e.g. Bartsch and Wellman 1995](#_ENREF_5)).
Several psychologists have claimed that children first engage in joint
action from around their first birthday and that engaging in joint
action facilitates these early improvements ([Moll and Tomasello
2007](#_ENREF_44); [Tomasello and Rakoczy 2003](#_ENREF_61); [Tomasello,
Carpenter*, et al.* 2005](#_ENREF_60); [Tomasello and Carpenter
2007](#_ENREF_59)). Joint actions that young children engage in include
tidying up the toys together ([Behne, Carpenter and Tomasello
2005](#_ENREF_6)), cooperatively pulling handles in sequence to make a
dog-puppet sing ([Brownell, Ramani and Zerwas 2006](#_ENREF_15)),
bouncing a ball on a large trampoline together ([Tomasello and Carpenter
2007](#_ENREF_59)) and pretending to row a boat together. The
psychologists claim that engaging in joint actions like these plays some
role in the early development of abilities to use concepts like belief,
desire, intention, knowledge and perception, and in the development of
higher forms of cognition more generally. My question is what joint
action could be given that some version of this claim is true.

The question arises because a leading account of joint action, Michael
Bratman's, is incompatible with the premise. To anticipate what is
explained in detail below, on the leading account engaging in joint
action requires sharing intentions, and sharing intentions requires
abilities to engage in reasoning about propositional
attitudes---reasoning of just the sort whose development was supposed to
be explained by engaging in joint action. So if the leading account were
the whole truth about joint action, engaging in joint action would
presuppose, and therefore could not explain, much of the development of
reasoning about others' mental states. Given that the premise is true,
the leading account cannot be the whole truth about joint action. We
need a further account of joint action, one that is compatible with the
premise that joint action plays a role in explaining how humans develop
abilities to think about minds and actions. Sections 4--8 provide such
an account. Before that, Section 2 outlines the leading account of joint
action and Section 3 explains why this account is incompatible with the
premise about development.

**2. What is joint action? The leading account**

Philosophers' paradigm cases of joint action include painting the house
together (Michael Bratman), lifting a heavy sofa together (David
Velleman), preparing a hollandaise sauce together (John Searle), going
to Chicago together (Christopher Kutz), and walking together (Margaret
Gilbert). One aim of an account of joint action is to identify features
of some or all of these cases in virtue of which they count as joint
actions. In this paper I focus on Michael Bratman's account because,
despite the clarity of its presentation, no decisive objection to the
parts of his account outlined below has yet been published, and also
because this account has been most influential in psychology. [^1]

Bratman characterises a kind of joint action he calls 'shared
intentional activity', which is activity explainable by shared
intention.[^2] This immediately leads to the question of what shared
intentions are. Bratman's answer has two parts, a specification of the
functional role shared intentions play and a substantial account of what
shared intentions could be. On the first part, Bratman stipulates that
the functional role of shared intentions is to:

> \(i\) coordinate activities; (ii) coordinate planning; and (iii)
> provide a framework to structure bargaining ([Bratman 1993:
> 99](#_ENREF_11))

To illustrate: if we share an intention that we cook dinner, this shared
intention will (iii) structure bargaining insofar as we may need to
decide what to cook or how to cook it on the assumption that we are
cooking it together; the shared intention will also require us to (ii)
coordinate our planning by each bringing complementary ingredients and
tools, and to (i) coordinate our activities by preparing the ingredients
in the right order.

Given this claim about what shared intentions are for, Bratman argues
that the following three conditions are collectively sufficient[^3] for
you and I to have a shared intention that we J. This is his substantial
account of what shared intentions could be:

> "1. (a) I intend that we J and (b) you intend that we J

 

> "2. I intend that we J in accordance with and because of la, lb, and
> meshing subplans of la and lb; you intend that we J in accordance with
> and because of la, lb, and meshing subplans of la and lb

 

> "3. 1 and 2 are common knowledge between us" ([Bratman 1993: View
> 4](#_ENREF_11))

In arguing that these are collectively sufficient conditions for shared
intention, Bratman combines two strategies. He argues that these
conditions collectively suffice to rule out certain cases where,
intuitively, there is no shared intention (such as the case where we
each intend to paint the house, I yellow and you blue). And he argues
that the attitudes specified in these conditions are collectively
capable of playing the three roles shared intentions are supposed to
play.

**3. Why shared intentional activity could not significantly foster an
understanding of minds**

Suppose that joint action plays a role in explaining the early
development of children's abilities to think about minds. Is Michael
Bratman's shared intentional activity a notion of joint action which
could play this role? Several psychologists have suggested that it is.
Thus Moll and Tomasello explicate their hypothesis that 'the unique
aspects of human cognition ... were driven by, or even constituted by
social cooperation' ([2007: 3](#_ENREF_44)) by appeal to 'a modified
version of Bratman's (1992) definition of "shared cooperative
activities" ... \[on which\] the participants in the cooperative
activity share a joint goal' ([2007: 3](#_ENREF_44)); in this context
'share a joint goal' means 'possess a shared intention'. Similarly,
Carpenter, in a discussion of joint action in infancy, writes:

> 'I will ... adopt Bratman's (1992) influential formulation of joint
> action ... \[F\]or an activity to be considered shared or joint each
> partner needs to intend to perform the joint action together ''in
> accordance with and because of meshing subplans'' (p. 338) and this
> needs to be common knowledge between the participants' ([Carpenter
> 2009: 281](#_ENREF_16)).

Others who appeal to Bratman's notion of shared intentional activity in
characterising children's first joint actions and their role in
development include Tomasello et al. ([2005: 680](#_ENREF_60)) and
Gräfenhain et al ([2009: 1430](#_ENREF_31)).

Recall that shared intentional activity requires shared intentions. On
Bratman's substantial account, sharing intentions requires having
intentions about intentions and even intentions about subplans of
intentions (see Condition 2 in the quote above). Bratman emphasises this
feature of the account:

> "each agent does not just intend that the group perform the \[...\]
> joint action. Rather, each agent intends as well that the group
> perform this joint action in accordance with subplans (of the
> intentions in favor of the joint action) that mesh" ([Bratman 1992:
> 332](#_ENREF_10)).

A natural thought at this point is that joint action might require only
plans which *in fact* mesh rather than *intentions about* the meshing of
plans. Bratman considers this option and explains why this weakening of
his account is not coherent ([1992: 331-3](#_ENREF_10)), so I shall not
pursue this thought.

The fact that shared intentions require intentions about intentions
suggests a potential objection to the view that shared intentional
activity explains early developments in children's abilities to think
about minds. For it seems unlikely that 2- and 3-year-olds, who
according to many findings are years away from being able to ascribe any
propositional attitudes at all,[^4] can form intentions about others'
intentions.[]{#_Ref160455442 .anchor}[^5] This would mean they cannot
meet the sufficient conditions Bratman lays out for sharing intentions.

This potential objection is weak because it depends on controversial
empirical claims about the absolute time in development at which
abilities to ascribe, and to form intentions about, intentions might
emerge. A more promising objection avoids this dependence. The ability
to form intentions about intentions involves a sophisticated kind of
propositional attitude ascription (as explained below). This ability is
required for sharing intentions in accordance with Bratman's substantial
account. So meeting the sufficient conditions for joint action given by
this account could not significantly *explain* the development of an
understanding of minds because it already *presupposes* too much
sophistication in the use of psychological concepts. [^6]

Note that, as it stands, this objection does not establish much. It
concerns conditions imposed by the substantial account of shared
intention which are sufficient but not necessary conditions.[^7] The
substantial account is supposed to characterise one---perhaps one among
many---ways in which the functional role of shared intentions can be
realised. So the objection serves only to raise a question. Are there in
fact alternative sufficient conditions for shared intention, conditions
that can be met without already having abilities to use psychological
concepts whose development was supposed to be explained by joint action?

The answer to this question is not entirely straightforward. We must
begin with the functional roles of shared intention, for these provide
necessary conditions. One of the roles of shared intentions is to
coordinate planning. What does coordinating planning involve?
Intuitively the idea is that just as individual intentions serve to
coordinate an individual's planning over time, so shared intentions
coordinate planning between agents. (I use the terms 'individual
intention' and 'individual goal' to refer to intentions and goals
explanatory of individual actions; an 'individual action' is an action
performed by just one agent such as that described by the sentence
'Ayesha repaired the puncture all by herself'.) A second role for shared
intentions is to structure bargaining concerning plans. To understand
these roles it is essential to understand what 'planning' means in this
context. The term 'planning' is sometimes used quite broadly to
encompass processes involved in low-level control over the execution of
sequences of movements, as is often required for manipulating objects
manually ([e.g. Haggard 1998](#_ENREF_32)), as well as processes
controlling the movements of a limb on a single trajectory ([e.g. Bizzu
2001](#_ENREF_7)). In Bratman's account and this paper, the term
'planning' is used in a narrower sense. Planning in this narrow sense
exists to coordinate an agent's various activities over relatively long
intervals of time; it involves practical reasoning and forming
intentions which may themselves require further planning, generating a
hierachy of plans and subplans. Paradigm cases include planning a
birthday party or planning to move house.

Given the functional roles of shared intention, when (if ever) must the
states which realise shared intentions include intentions about others'
intentions? Coordinating plans with others does not seem always or in
principle to require specific intentions about others' intentions. It is
plausible that in everyday life some of our plans are coordinated
largely thanks to a background of shared preferences, habits and
conventions. Consider, for example, people who often meet in a set place
at a fixed time of day to discuss research over lunch. These people can
coordinate their lunch plans merely by setting a date and following
established routine; providing nothing unexpected happens, they seem not
to need intentions about each other's intentions. Within limits, then,
coordinating plans may not always require intentions about intentions.
The same may hold for structuring bargaining. But when the background of
shared preferences, habits and conventions is not sufficient to ensure
that our plans will be coordinated, it is necessary to monitor or
manipulate others' plans. And since intentions are the basic elements of
plans (in the special sense of 'plan' in terms of which Bratman defined
shared intention), this means monitoring or manipulating others'
intentions. The background which makes for effortlessly coordinated
planning is absent when our aims are sufficiently novel, when the
circumstances sufficiently unusual (as in many emergencies), and when
our co-actors are sufficiently unfamiliar. In all of these cases,
coordinating plans and structuring bargaining will involve monitoring or
manipulating others' intentions. Now this does not necessarily involve
forming intentions about their intentions because, in principle,
monitoring and manipulating others' intentions could (within limits) be
achieved by representing states which serve as proxies for intentions
rather than by representing intentions as such, much as one can (within
limits) monitor and manipulate others' visual perceptions by
representing their lines of sight. But possession of general abilities
to monitor and manipulate others' intentions does require being able to
form intentions about others' intentions.

The question was whether there are sufficient conditions for shared
intention which do not presuppose abilities to use psychological
concepts whose development is supposed to be explained by joint action.
As promised, the answer is not straightforward. In a limited range of
cases, coordinating plans and perhaps structuring bargaining does not
appear to require insights into other minds. But in other cases,
particularly cases involving novel aims or agents unfamiliar with each
other, intentions about others' intentions are generally required.

The main question for this section was whether Bratman's account
captures a notion of joint action suitable for explaining the early
development of children's abilities to think about minds. Some of the
joint actions which young children engage in involve novel aims, and
some involve unfamiliar partners. So if these joint actions did involve
coordinating planning and structuring bargaining, they could not rest on
a shared background but would require abilities to form intentions about
others' intentions. It follows that joint action would presuppose much
of the sophistication in the use of psychological concepts whose
development it was supposed to explain. So given the premise that joint
action plays a role in explaining early developments in understanding
minds, it cannot be the case that the joint actions children engage in
as soon as they engage in any joint actions involve shared intentions as
characterised by Bratman.

This conclusion rests on the assumption that having intentions about
intentions involves some of the psychological sophistication whose
development is supposed to be explained by appeal to joint action. One
might object that the ability for form intentions about intentions is
somehow less sophisticated than abilities to form other kinds of
representation of other kinds of mental states. To answer the objection
it is sufficient to clarify what 'intention' means in this context. For
the term 'intention', like 'planning', is used to mean different things
by different researchers. Sometimes 'intention' and 'goal' are used
interchangeably in describing behaviour which is somewhat flexibly
organised around some outcome ([e.g. Premack 1990: 14](#_ENREF_46)). But
in this context we need a different notion of intention, one on which
intentions are elements of plans. Such intentions play a role in
coordinating an agent's activities over time. Their role is
characterised in part by normative constraints expressed in terms of the
propositional contents of intentions. For instance, one norm
characteristic of the role of intentions in plans requires an agent to
avoid ways of realising one intention that will make it impossible for
her to realise other intentions she has (all things being equal). This
norm requires someone who intends both to visit an aunt and to buy some
shoes in a single evening to limit time spent on each activity to allow
for the other. Another norm characteristic of intention concerns the
compatibility of having multiple intentions simultaneously: it is not
rational to have multiple intentions unless it is rational to have a
single intention agglomerating them all ([Bratman 1987](#_ENREF_9)).
Norms such as these, together with the role of intentions in practical
reasoning, are what characterise the role of intentions in planning.
Given that intentions are characterised in this way as elements in
plans, it seems necessary that understanding intentions will involve
some grasp both of the role that intentions as propositional attitudes
play in practical reasoning and also of the norms relating intentions to
planning. Of course this does not mean that individuals who understand
intentions as elements in plans can articulate or list the relevant
roles or norms. But it does mean that they should sometimes be sensitive
to some of the requirements these norms impose and also that they would
be able to recognise some of the norms as correct in optimal conditions.
This is why requiring intentions about intentions presupposes
significant psychological sophistication.

Given that joint action facilitates the development of mental
understanding, and that (as just argued) Bratman's notion of shared
intentional activity is not a kind of joint action which could play this
role, does it follow that Bratman's account is incorrect?[^8] Drawing
this conclusion would require the further assumption that there is just
one kind of joint action. This is not obviously true. Compare individual
action. It is sometimes accepted that there is a distinction between
intentional action and other kinds of action such as response behaviours
and merely purposive activities ([Dickinson and Balleine
2000](#_ENREF_21); [Frankfurt 1971](#_ENREF_22)). Because there may be
an analogous distinction between kinds of joint action, the
developmental considerations do not directly bear on the correctness of
Bratman's account. Perhaps what we need is not a modified version of
Bratman's account but an account of a different kind of joint action.

To sum up, Bratman's account does not characterise a kind of joint
action which could play a role in explaining how children come to
understand minds. In the next section I consider whether this undermines
the claim that the interactions highlighted by developmental
psychologists are really joint actions before offering a new account of
joint action in the following sections.

**4. Joint action, shared intention and coordinated planning**

The argument of the previous section establishes that not all of the
following claims are true:

> \(1\) joint action fosters an understanding of minds;
>
> \(2\) all joint action involves shared intention; and
>
> \(3\) a function of shared intention is to coordinate two or more
> agents' plans.

These claims are inconsistent because if the second and third were both
true, abilities to engage in joint action would presuppose, and so could
not significantly foster, an understanding of minds. For all that has
been said so far, any of these claims could be rejected. In what follows
I characterise a form of joint action which involves what I call 'shared
goals' and no shared intentions. The aim is to show by construction that
there are forms of joint action which require minimal cognitive
sophistication. In doing this I shall provide grounds for rejecting the
claim that joint action always involves shared intention, (2),
strengthening the case for accepting the premise about development, (1),
while remaining neutral on whether shared intentions function to
coordinate planning, (3).

Some researchers assert that all joint actions involve shared
intentions. For instance, Tomasello writes that '\[t\]he sine qua non of
collaborative action is a joint goal and a joint commitment' ([2008:
181](#_ENREF_58)). Here 'joint goal' refers to shared intention in
Bratman's sense and 'collaborative action' includes joint actions early
in development. Similarly, Gilbert writes 'I take collective action to
involve a collective intention' ([2006: 5](#_ENREF_27)). Perhaps, then,
a better strategy than the one I propose would be to reject the first
claim, (1), above and conjecture that joint action cannot significantly
foster an understanding of minds (although some lesser form of
interaction may do so). But it is striking that none of the researchers
who assert that all joint action involves shared intention provide an
argument, and narrowly semantic considerations provide no support for
this assertion ([Ludwig 2007: 367](#_ENREF_41); [Smith
forthcoming](#_ENREF_54)). In fact other researchers have assumed
without argument that not all joint actions involve shared intention
([Bratman 1992: 330](#_ENREF_10); [Schmidt, Fitzpatrick*, et al.* 2010:
2010](#_ENREF_50); [Vesper, Butterfill*, et al.* 2010](#_ENREF_65)). On
what grounds could we accept this assumption or its negation?

Let us step back. What features other than shared intention indicate
that the actions of two or more agents constitute a joint action as
opposed to any other kind of interaction? Here are several indicators of
joint action:

> i\. this case seems to fit with paradigm examples of joint action such
> as walking, cooking or playing the piano together ([Gilbert
> 1990](#_ENREF_25); [Velleman 2000](#_ENREF_64); [Goebl and Palmer
> 2009](#_ENREF_28));
>
> ii\. the candidate joint action differs from a case in which the
> agents perform the same type of activity (such as walking or cooking)
> in parallel rather than together ([Gilbert 1990](#_ENREF_25); [Bratman
> 2009: 150](#_ENREF_14); [Gräfenhain, Behne*, et al.*
> 2009](#_ENREF_31));
>
> iii\. for each agent, acting together rather than individually is
> voluntary in this sense: in so far as they control which means they
> adopt in pursuing a goal, such as whether to move an object by lifting
> it or by dragging it, they can also control whether their actions are
> individual or joint;
>
> iv\. there is a sense in which all of the agents' actions taken
> together are directed to a single goal, and this is not just a matter
> of each agent's action being individually directed to that goal;
>
> v\. there is a description of the interaction with a plural subject
> and an action verb, such as 'they are bouncing the ball on the
> trampoline' ([Kutz 2000 emphasises this indicator](#_ENREF_40));
>
> vi\. each agent is disposed to modify her actions in accordance with
> what is needed to achieve the goal given how the other agents' actions
> are unfolding ([Bratman 1992: 328](#_ENREF_10)).

I am not suggesting that any of these features is necessary for joint
action, nor that they are collectively sufficient. My claim is just
these features are relevant to deciding whether an interaction is a
joint action, and that where an interaction has many or all of these
features we have (defeasible) grounds to infer that it is a joint
action. In short, I propose that, in the absence of a deeper analysis,
we should take these features as a rough and provisional explication of
one theoretically significant way of using the term 'joint action'.[^9]

So what about the objection that all joint action involves shared
intention? The following will provide (defeasible) grounds for rejecting
it. For I shall show that some interactions have the features listed
above, (i)-(vi), but do not involve shared intention.

**5. Plural activities**

Our question is what joint action could be on the assumption that it
fosters an understanding of minds. We have seen (in Section 3) that the
answer cannot involve appeal to shared intention. Joint actions
involving shared intention presuppose, and so cannot significantly
foster the development of, sophisticated uses of psychological concepts.
What we need, then, is to identify a form of joint action that requires
as little psychological sophistication as possible; by presupposing less
we make it possible to explain more.

I shall approach this task indirectly by first considering forms of
action involving multiple agents more basic than any kind of joint
action. Some ants harvest plant hair and fungus in order to build traps
to capture large insects; once captured, many worker ants sting the
large insects, transport them and carve them up ([Dejean, Solano*, et
al.* 2005](#_ENREF_19)). The ants' behaviours have an interesting
feature distinct from their being coordinated: each ant's behaviours are
individually organised around an outcome---the fly's death---which
occurs as a common effect of many ants' behaviours. We can say that
there is a single activity---killing a fly---which several ants
performed. In general, a plural activity is one involving two or more
agents. As I shall use the term 'plural activity', for agents to be
engaged in a plural activity it is sufficient that each agent's
activities are individually organised around a single outcome which
occurs as a common effect of all the agents' activities.

Note that nothing controversial is assumed in stating these sufficient
conditions for plural activity. The first ingredient is the notion that
an individual's behaviours can be organised around an outcome. This is
shorthand for an open-ended disjunction of cases; it means that there is
an intention, habit, biological function or other behaviour-organizing
circumstance connecting the individual's behaviours to the outcome. The
second ingredient is the notion of a common effect, which is not
specific to action. The fly's capture is a common effect of the ants'
individual behaviours in just the sense that the fly's death is a common
effect of the multiple doses of poison it received: none of the doses
was individually deadly, each had its murderous effect only in concert
with some of the others. As characterised here, the notion of a plural
activity depends on nothing more controversial than the cogency of these
two ingredients.

My use of the term 'plural activity' is different from other natural
uses of this term and may be too broad to pick out an intuitive
category. If Helen and Ayesha individually aim to smooth a section of
pavement by shuffling their feet when they walk over it and if it does
become smooth partly as a consequence of both their efforts, then they
are engaged in the plural activity of smoothing the pavement. This is
true even in the absence of any intention to act together. It is true
even if their lives do not overlap at all, so that there may be no
intuitive sense in which their smoothing the pavement is a joint action.
Allowing this case to count as a plural activity does no harm for
present purposes and makes it possible to characterise a useful notion
of plural activity in uncontroversial terms.

Another potentially unnatural feature of this definition of plural
activity is that it requires success. By definition, where two or more
agents' actions constitute a plural activity the outcome to which they
are directed must occur. This simplifies the definition in ways that
will shortly be useful.

Humans sometimes perform activities that are plural in the minimal sense
that some ants' behaviours are. In a particularly sulky mood Thomas
pulls on one end of a large boat in order to move it; he does not
realise that Illaria is pushing the other end and that without her
contribution the boat would not move. He succeeds in moving the boat, as
does Illaria. So there is a single activity---moving the boat---which
they both perform. Even though Thomas' action is goal-directed (its goal
is to move the boat to the sea), his activity is plural only in the
minimal sense that the ants' fly-trapping behaviour is: it is organised
around an outcome which occurs as a common effect. The plural nature of
such activities need not show up in intentions, desires or beliefs. That
an activity is performed by two individuals does not require that they
intend, believe or desire this to be so.

What most philosophers mean by joint action is not, or not only, this
minimal notion of plural activity. Certainly this minimal notion is
inadequate for our present purpose, which is to understand what joint
action could be on the assumption that it plays some role in explaining
how children come to understand minds. Nevertheless, the notion of
plural activity is a useful starting point for understanding a kind of
joint action relevant to explaining development.

**6. What is the function of shared goals?**

In giving an account of one kind of joint action I shall first identify
something I call 'shared goals'. Before starting it will be helpful to
fix terminology. As I use the term 'goal' it refers to an outcome,
actual or possible, and not to a state. I make no direct use of the
notion that agents can have goals (as in 'Sam's goal was to topple the
president') and focus on relations between goals and actions (as in 'the
goal of Marvin's action was to upset Ayesha'). An action is
*goal-directed* where it makes sense to ask which of its possible and
actual outcomes are goals to which the action was directed. One paradigm
case of goal-directed action involves intention: where an agent acts on
an intention, the intention's content specifies a goal to which her
action is directed. In addition, an action can arguably be directed to a
goal which is not specified in the content of any of the agent's
intentions ([Bratman 1984](#_ENREF_8)). There may also be forms of
action which are goal-directed but do not involve intention at all.[^10]
Certainly there are ways of representing actions as goal-directed which
do not involve representing intentions or any other propositional
attitudes of agents.

The term 'shared' is used loosely. Just as, on most accounts, shared
intentions are neither literally intentions nor literally shared (no
single intention is mine and yours), so shared goals are not goals (they
are complexes of states and relations) and do not by definition alone
involve anything which is literally shared. I have used the otherwise
infelicitous label 'shared goal' in order to highlight the basic
intuition behind the positive account of joint action I shall offer:
some cases of joint action involve structures which bind not the agents'
intentions but the goals to which their activities are directed.[^11]

Having fixed terminology we can now turn to the primary issue, which is
to identify shared goals. Following the model provided by Bratman's
account of shared intentions, my account of shared goals has two parts:
a specification of their function role and a substantial description of
states that could realise them. This section is about the functional
role of shared goals, the following section concerns their realisation.
To emphasise, questions about the mental states involved in sharing
goals will be deferred until the next section; in this section the
question is only what shared goals are for.

Successful plural activity generally requires coordination. How is this
coordination achieved? In the case of ants such coordination may be
achieved hormonally. In humans, who can voluntarily engage in plural
activities with novel outcomes, coordination can usually only be
achieved psychologically. This is what shared goals are for. Shared
goals coordinate multiple agents' goal-directed activities around an
outcome to be achieved as a common effect of their efforts. That is,
their function is to coordinate plural activities.

An illustration may help to clarify what performing this function
amounts to. There is a fallen tree lying across the road. Several people
each want it moved, but none of them can move it by themselves and none
of them can control the others' actions. The tree's movement can only be
secured as common effect of several people's actions. In this situation,
there is a need for several people to coordinate their goal-directed
activities. They need to lift in complementary directions and at
suitably related times; and if lifting doesn't work, they need to change
strategy and try pushing or something else that might achieve the
outcome. The role of shared goals is to coordinate these goal-directed
activities.

In the above illustration, plural activity is necessary to achieve an
outcome. Shared goals also play a role in situations where plural
activity occurs even though it is not necessary. For instance, Amin and
Bertram each individually aim to put a large barrel into a boat. Either
of them could move the barrel into the boat alone or their doing this
could be a plural activity; the choice is theirs. The sequence of
activities Amin would need to perform to put the barrel in the boat
differs depending on whether he is acting alone or with Bertram. Acting
alone, Amin would position himself so that the barrel and boat are in
front of him, throw his arms around the middle of barrel, raise it, tilt
back and then push up and forwards. If he chose to act with Bertram,
Amin would need to take an entirely different approach. It is this need
that shared goals answer.

The notion that a function of shared goals is to coordinate
goal-directed activities needs qualifying because all action involves
coordination at several levels. Any goal-directed action, individual or
joint, will be realised by a collection of simple object-directed
actions such as pushing, pulling and tearing; and these in turn will be
realized by some kind of motor actions, and so on until at some point we
reach continuous bodily movements. Plainly most tasks require
coordination at several of these levels; for instance, passing an object
from one hand to another requires precise timing of releases and grasps
as well as appropriate positioning in space. At some levels,
coordination is largely independent of which goals agents' actions are
directed to (for example, it can be hard to use one's hands in an
uncoordinated way even when doing so would be advantageous). This is
true even for coordination of multiple agents' activities. We may
coordinate with others without being aware of how we are coordinating or
even that we are coordinating ([Richardson, Campbell and Schmidt
2009](#_ENREF_48)). In fact there seem to be several forms of *emergent
coordination*, that is, coordination which is independent of the goals
of an agent's actions ([Knoblich, Butterfill and Sebanz
2010](#_ENREF_37)). Clearly, then, shared goals are not the only factor
in coordinating plural activity. The role of shared goals is limited to
coordinating goal-directed actions and not their non-purposive
components, and it may be that shared goals can play this role only
thanks to the existence of other mechanisms of emergent coordination.

Shared goals resemble shared intentions insofar as both exist to
coordinate activities. They differ in that structuring bargaining and
coordinating planning are not functions of shared goals. On some views,
the distinction I have drawn between shared intentions and shared goals
parallels a distinction between individual intentions and more primitive
states connecting individuals' activities with the goals to which they
are directed. For individual intentions are sometimes held to be
intrinsically elements in agents' plans and therefore absent from the
lives of any agents incapable of planning ([Bratman 2007](#_ENREF_13)).
Such agents (if there are any) may need to act when faced with equally
desirable alternatives and to coordinate their activities around goals
despite fluctuations in desire. This need might be met by states which
resemble intentions in that they exist in part to coordinate a single
agent's activities and in that they connect the agent's activities to a
goal, but differ from intentions in lacking planning functions. Given
this distinction, shared intentions would stand to shared goals roughly
as individual intentions stand to their more primitive counterparts.

The limited function of shared goals makes them better suited than
shared intentions for characterising the cases studied in developmental
research. Many, perhaps all, of these cases would not normally require
coordinated planning. As mentioned above, these cases include tidying up
the toys together and cooperatively pulling handles in sequence in order
to make a puppet sing. As coordinated planning is not needed in such
cases, nor are shared intentions. What is needed, though, is for the
agents' goal-directed actions to be coordinated. This is what shared
goals are for.

**7. Which states could realise shared goals?**

In the previous section I identified shared goals in terms of their
function, which is to coordinate plural activities. The next step is to
characterise states capable of realising this function.

To start with an illustration, suppose that a goal of Amin's actions in
the near future will be move a large barrel into a boat. Amin
anticipates that some of Bertram's future actions will have the same
goal, and Amin expects the barrel's moving into the boat to occur as a
common effect of his own goal-directed actions and Bertram's. For his
part, moving the barrel into the boat will also be a goal of Bertram's
actions and Bertram has expectations mirroring Amin's. In favourable
circumstances their goal-directed contributions to a plural activity of
moving the barrel into the boat could be coordinated in virtue of this
pattern of goal-relations and expectations. Accordingly, the existence
of such goal-relations and expectations are sufficient for Amin and
Bertram to share the goal of getting the barrel into the boat.

Here are the key features of this case expressed in general terms:

> \(a\) *one goal, two or more agents---*
>
> there is a single goal, G, to which each agent's actions are, or will
> be, individually directed;
>
> \(b\) *identification---*
>
> each agent can identify each of the other agents in a way that doesn't
> depend on knowledge of the goal or actions directed to it;
>
> \(c\) *expectations about goal-directed actions---*
>
> on balance[^12] each agent expects each of the other agents she can
> identify to perform an action directed to the goal; and
>
> \(d\) *expectations about a common effect---*
>
> on balance each agent expects this goal to occur as a common effect of
> all of their actions directed to the goal, her own and the others'.

In favourable circumstances and in concert with emergent coordination,
these goal-relations and expectations could serve to coordinate the
goal-directed plural activities of two or more agents (I shall say which
circumstances are favourable below). Since 'shared goal' was defined in
terms of this coordinating function, (a)-(d) are collectively sufficient
for possessing a shared goal.

Let us consider these four features in turn. The first feature, (a), is
required just because we are concerned with plural activities; by
definition, actions comprising a plural activity are directed to a
single goal such as moving a particular barrel onto a certain boat (see
Section 4). The second feature, (b), was not explicit in the description
of Amin and Bertram's barrel moving. It excludes the following sort of
case. Mia and Sobani are in a crowded space. Each intends to move a
table and, thanks to her background knowledge, expects that exactly one
other agent intends the same. But neither Mia nor Sobani can identify
who else she expects to be involved in moving the table, except
trivially as the other table-mover. In this case, the pattern of
goal-relations and expectations in (a), (c) and (d) could have at most a
limited effect on Mia and Sobani's ability to coordinate their efforts.
So the identification requirement, (b), is included because the
coordinating effect of (a), (c) and (d) seem to depend on it.
Identification may not feature whenever agents have a shared goal;
(a)-(d) collectively provide only sufficient conditions.

The third and fourth features, (c) and (d), involve expectations.
Knowledge states and beliefs both count as expectations but it is not
necessary to have either. In developmental research, looking times and
eye movements are regularly used as measures of infants' expectations
concerning goals (for example, [Gergely, Nadasky*, et al.*
1995](#_ENREF_24); [Csibra, Bíró*, et al.* 2003](#_ENREF_18); [Gergely
and Csibra 2003](#_ENREF_23); [Luo and Baillargeon 2005](#_ENREF_42);
[Woodward and Sommerville 2000](#_ENREF_69)). It is an open question
whether these sorts of expectations are beliefs. Where such expectations
do not merely control looking times and eye movements but also inform a
range of goal-directed actions in ways that are rational given their
contents, then expectations of this type are sufficient for sharing
goals whether or not they amount to beliefs. This marks one contrast
between requirements on sharing goals and sharing intentions. Given that
intentions function to coordinate planning in Bratman's intellectual
sense of planning and given some plausible norms governing the
rationality of planning ([Hawthorne 2004: 29-31](#_ENREF_33)), sharing
an intention will require knowledge of others' intentions and their
relations to one's own. By contrast, sharing a goal does not require
knowledge. because several kinds of expectation which fall short of
knowledge are sufficient for coordinating plural activities.

The third feature, (c), concerns expectations about other agents'
goal-directed actions. This is a minimal counterpart of the requirement
that agents who share an intention represent each other's intentions.
Possessing a shared goal requires representing only goal-directed
actions. It is possible to represent an action as goal-directed without
representing (or even being able to represent) intentions or any other
propositional attitudes. For instance, an agent might represent goals as
functions of actions.[^13] There are strong theoretical and empirical
grounds to hold that representing goal-directed actions requires less
conceptual sophistication, and may be less cognitively demanding, than
representing intentions as such.

The fourth feature, (d), concerns the agents' expectations that the goal
to which their actions are directed will occur as a common effect of
their efforts. This and the third feature are jointly equivalent to
requiring that the each agent expects that she and the other agents are
engaged in a plural activity with goal G. (The agents may not actually
be engaged in a single plural activity because, as noted earlier, plural
activities are by definition successful whereas it is possible to
possesses a shared goal without succeeding.) The claim that features
(a)-(d) are sufficient for agents to possess a shared goal is the claim
that this combination of features could function to coordinate plural
activities. In essence, the claim is this: an expectation, on the part
of each agent concerned, that she is or will be involved in a plural
activity with the others, will, in favourable circumstances and in
concert with emergent coordination, normally enable them to coordinate
their actions.

Shared intention is sometimes thought to involve common knowledge in
such a way that agents who share an intention can know that they share
an intention.[^14] By contrast, it is possible to have a shared goal
without knowing that one does. Agents can have, and act on (see Section
8 below), a shared goal without understanding their actions as
comprising anything more than a plural activity.

The above pattern of goal-relations and expectations, (a)-(d), can play
its coordinating role only in favourable circumstances. What makes
circumstances *un*favourable? One factor is a lack of freedom. To
illustrate, suppose that Hendrik and Arch are instructed to tidy the
toys away. Arch would not normally obey this instruction but Hendrik
convincingly threatens reprisals unless Arch tidies all the toys away.
For the goal of tidying the toys away, (a)-(d) above could all obtain in
this case (Hendrik fulfils (a) by the act of threatening). But any
coordinating effect this pattern of goal-relations and expectations
might have had is trumped by Hendrik's control over Arch's actions.
Arch's lack of freedom is an unfavourable circumstance, that is, one in
which the coordinating role of shared goals may be blocked. Another
unfavourable circumstance is antagonism to plural activity. Suppose that
Ella and Cohen have been tasked with wiping a table clean. Ella is
desperate to clean the table without Cohen, and Cohen is desperate to
clean it without Ella. Neither thinks this will be possible, and they
satisfy (a)-(d) above. But because they are desperate to act alone, each
tries to sabotage the other's efforts. Any coordinating effect the
shared goal might have had is overridden by the agents' antagonism to
plural activity. In short, then, favourable circumstances are those in
which factors that would defeat the coordinating tendency of the pattern
of goal-relations and expectations in (a)-(d) are absent; paradigm
defeating factors are a lack of freedom and antagonism towards plural
activity.

**8. Shared goals characterise one form of joint action**

So far I have stipulated that the function of shared goals is to
coordinate plural activities and argued that this function could be
realised by a certain pattern of goal-relations and expectations.
Finally I shall use this to characterise a form of joint action which,
lacking the cognitive and conceptual demands associated with shared
intentional action, could be used to explicate the premise that engaging
in joint action fosters an understanding of minds.

Shared goals are characteristic of a form of joint action but the
relation between possession of a shared goal and performing a joint
action is not straightforward. Compare ordinary individual action.
Acting intentionally is not just a matter of acting and simultaneously
intending; nor is it even just a matter of being caused to act by an
intention ([Searle 1983: 136-7](#_ENREF_51)). Relatedly, we should not
suppose that the mere presence, or even the mere efficacy, of a shared
goal is sufficient for joint action. Take any collection of actions
directed to a single goal, G, involving two or more agents. Let us say
that these actions, taken collectively, are *driven by a shared goal*
when G is a shared goal of the agents, when, in performing actions
directed to this goal, they are acting on the associated expectations
and any other attitudes in ways that are rational, and when their so
acting functions to coordinate their actions in a way that would
normally facilitate the goal's occurring as a common effect of all their
efforts. (I assume that, although the expectations mentioned in Section
7 may not be necessary for possessing a shared goal, some such
expectations are always involved.) I claim that actions driven by shared
goals are joint actions.

Why accept this? Recall the six indicators of joint action identified
earlier (Section 4). Where these three conditions hold of an
interaction, most of these indicators will be present. The interaction
will be distinct from a case in which the agents pursue the goal in
parallel and without a shared goal (this was the second indicator). The
action will be voluntary with respect to its jointness insofar as
jointness is partly due to agents acting on their expectations in ways
that are rational, as contrasted with interactions where coordination
involves only involuntary forms of emergent coordination (third
indicator). If the goal occurs, this will normally be in part because of
the coordination provided by the shared goal; in this sense, the
coordination serves to direct the agents' actions, taken together, to
the goal and this amounts to more than each agent's actions being
individually directed to the goal (fourth indicator). Finally, the
agents' dispositions to adapt their actions to each other's is built
into the requirement that the shared goal function to coordinate their
actions by means of their acting on the associated expectations (sixth
indicator). In short, actions driven by shared goals have many features
indicative of joint action. This is reason to hold that they are in fact
joint actions.

Not every case in which actions are driven by shared goals fits
intuitively with paradigm examples of joint action. Consider two drivers
on a collision course in a narrow street. Suppose (perhaps
unrealistically) that each acts with the goal of avoiding a collision
between their cars, expects the other to do the same and expects that
they will avoid collision thanks to their combined efforts. This is
sufficient for avoiding a collision to be a shared goal. (Note that
specifying the goal requires care: the drivers' actions would have
different goals if, for instance, the only goal of each driver's action
were to avoid hitting the other.) Suppose also that their actions are
driven by a shared goal in the sense defined above. So, on the above
account, their avoiding collision is a joint action. (Not all cases of
avoiding a collision are joint actions, only those, if any, which are
driven by shared goals.) But intuitively this case may not seem to fit
with paradigms of joint action because the interaction is so minor. If
this counts as joint action, then, given the right goal-relations and
expectations, so could passing someone in a corridor. Should we modify
the account of joint action in order to exclude this sort of case? There
is an obstacle to doing that. We could elaborate a series of
interactions driven by the shared goal of avoiding collision where each
interaction is slightly less minor than its predecessor in the series.
Whether or not intuitions support drawing a boundary, it seems that no
such boundary is theoretically significant for understanding the role of
joint action in development. Since our aim is to characterise joint
action as it fosters development, we should risk deviating from
intuition to avoid otherwise unnecessary complexity.

There is another sort of case in which actions driven by a shared goal
may not intuitively fit with paradigm joint actions. Consider again the
two drivers whose goal is to avoid collision. Now suppose, in addition,
that the first driver hawkishly accelerates while covertly preparing to
brake if necessary, causing the second driver to brake hard. Given the
present account, their actions nevertheless constitute joint action.
This may not fit intuitively with paradigm joint actions because the
first driver dominates the second (and does so by means of
deception).[^15] Again it is possible to elaborate a series of cases
involving gradually varying degrees of domination. While outright
coercion is incompatible with joint action on the account I have offered
(see Section 7 above), neither domination nor other failures to be
cooperative are excluded. This may conflict with intuitions about joint
action but reduces the complexity of the account. That the account is
nevertheless an account of joint action is shown by the presence of the
other indicators of joint action mentioned above.

Accounts of joint action sometimes invoke special kinds of mental state
([Searle 1990 \[2002\]](#_ENREF_52); [Gilbert 1992](#_ENREF_26)),
special kinds of reasoning ([Gold and Sugden 2007a](#_ENREF_29)),
special kinds of interdependence ([Bratman 1993](#_ENREF_11); [Miller
2001](#_ENREF_43)) or, apparently, special kinds of agent ([Helm
2008](#_ENREF_34)). The present account, if successful, shows that there
is a simple kind of joint action characterising which requires no such
special ingredients. The simple kind of joint action involves only
ordinary individual goal directed-actions being coordinated in part by
expectations about others' goal-directed actions and their common
effects.

There are, of course, questions and puzzles about joint action which the
simple account offered here does not address and which may call for
greater complexity. These include issues about commitment ([Gilbert
2006](#_ENREF_27)), the coordination of decisions to act jointly
([Velleman 1997](#_ENREF_63)), the kind of reasoning needed for
coordinating choices ([Sugden 2000](#_ENREF_55)), and the possibilities
of intending others' actions ([Searle 1990 \[2002\]](#_ENREF_52),
[1994](#_ENREF_53)) and of acting on others' intentions ([Roth
2004](#_ENREF_49)). Failure to address these questions or tackle these
puzzles might be an objection if the simple account were meant to be the
whole story about joint action. In fact the simple account is not
supposed to apply to every case of joint action. For instance, painting
a house together will probably involve intentionally coordinating plans
and so require sharing intentions rather than merely sharing goals. On
the other hand, in some cases joint action does not require planning,
commitment, coordinating decisions to act or special kinds of reasoning.
Knoblich and Sebanz offer an example:

> "the way people lift a two-handled basket depends on whether they lift
> it alone or together. When alone, a person would normally grasp each
> handle with one hand. When together, one person would normally grasp
> the left handle with his/her right hand and the other person would
> grasp the right handle with his/her left hand" ([2008:
> 2026](#_ENREF_38)).

Because handles provide an obvious way for two people to lift the basket
(these authors even postulate a joint affordance) and people are often
skilled at coordinated lifting, planning is typically unnecessary and it
is plausible that shared goals are sufficient for joint actions of this
sort.[^16]

**9. Conclusion**

The question was this. Given the premise that joint action plays some
role in explaining how children come to understand minds, what could
joint action be? The negative point was that it couldn't involve sharing
intentions for reasons connected to the fact that sharing intentions
involves coordinating planning and so requires sophistication in
ascribing propositional attitudes. The positive claim was that there is
a simple account of joint action which is compatible with the
developmental premise. On the simple account, joint action involves
sharing goals and sharing goals requires only an understanding of
goal-directed actions and their common effects.

This simple account of joint action is not offered as a replacement for
Bratman's account or any accounts competing with his. Bratman's account
assumes that joint action involves shared intention where the functions
of shared intention include coordinating paradigmatically long-term
plans. Such an account may be required to characterise complex cases
where success demands that agents' plans mesh. But some cases of joint
action (such as carrying a two-handled basket together) do not involve
plans in the relevant sense of planning. The agents need to coordinate
their activities but not their plans. The simple account applies only in
such cases. In philosophical accounts of individual action, actions
explainable by intending are sometimes distinguished from other kinds of
individual action including response behaviours, arrational actions and
merely purposive activities ([Dickinson and Balleine 1993](#_ENREF_20);
[Hursthouse 1991](#_ENREF_36); [Velleman 2000](#_ENREF_64)). Comparable
distinctions are certain to be needed for understanding joint action;
the differences between shared intentions and shared goals mark one such
distinction between kinds of joint action.

**References**

[]{#_ENREF_1 .anchor}Apperly, Ian A. and Stephen Butterfill (2009), \"Do
humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like states?\".
[Psychological Review]{.underline}, 2009(116):4

[]{#_ENREF_2 .anchor}Astington, Janet (1991), \"Intention in the
Child\'s Theory of Mind\", in D. Frye and C. Moore (eds.), *Children\'s
Theories of Mind: mental states and social understanding*. Hove:
Erlbaum.

[]{#_ENREF_3 .anchor}Astington, Janet and Alison Gopnik (1991),
\"Developing Understanding of Desire and Intention\", in A. Whiten (ed.)
*Natural Theories of the Mind: evolution, development and simulation of
everyday mindreading*. Oxford: Blackwell.

[]{#_ENREF_4 .anchor}Baillargeon, Renée, Rose M. Scott and Zijing He
(2010), \"False-belief understanding in infants\". [Trends in Cognitive
Sciences]{.underline}, 14(3):110-118

[]{#_ENREF_5 .anchor}Bartsch, Karen and Henry M. Wellman (1995),
*Children talk about the mind.* New York ; Oxford: Oxford University
Press

[]{#_ENREF_6 .anchor}Behne, Tanya, Malinda Carpenter and Michael
Tomasello (2005), \"One-year-olds comprehend the communicative
intentions behind gestures in a hiding game\". [Developmental
Science]{.underline}, 8(6):492-499

[]{#_ENREF_7 .anchor}Bizzu, Emilio (2001), \"Motor Control\", in R. A.
Wilson and F. C. Keil (eds.), *The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive
Sciences*. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

[]{#_ENREF_8 .anchor}Bratman, Michael (1984), \"Two Faces of
Intention\". [The Philosophical Review]{.underline}, 93(3):375-405

[]{#_ENREF_9 .anchor}\-\-- (1987), *Intentions, Plans, and Practical
Reasoning.* Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press

[]{#_ENREF_10 .anchor}\-\-- (1992), \"Shared Cooperative Activity\".
[The Philosophical Review]{.underline}, 101(2):327-341

[]{#_ENREF_11 .anchor}\-\-- (1993), \"Shared Intention\".
[Ethics]{.underline}, 104:97-113

[]{#_ENREF_12 .anchor}\-\-- (1999 \[1997\]), \"I Intend that We J\", in
*Faces of Intention*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[]{#_ENREF_13 .anchor}\-\-- (2007), *Structures of Agency.* Oxford:
Oxford University Press

[]{#_ENREF_14 .anchor}\-\-- (2009), \"Modest Sociality and the
Distinctiveness of Intention\". [Philosophical Studies]{.underline},
144(1):149-165

[]{#_ENREF_15 .anchor}Brownell, Celia A., Geetha B. Ramani and Stephanie
Zerwas (2006), \"Becoming a social partner with peers: cooperation and
social understanding in one- and two-year-olds\". [Child
Development]{.underline}, 77(4):803-21

[]{#_ENREF_16 .anchor}Carpenter, Malinda (2009), \"Just how joint is
joint action in infancy?\". [Topics in Cognitive Science]{.underline},
1(2):380-392

[]{#_ENREF_17 .anchor}Csibra, Gergely (2008), \"Goal attribution to
inanimate agents by 6.5-month-old infants\". [Cognition]{.underline},
107(2):705-717

[]{#_ENREF_18 .anchor}Csibra, Gergely, Szilvia Bíró, Orsolya Koós and
György Gergely (2003), \"One-year-old infants use teleological
representations of actions productively\". [Cognitive
Science]{.underline}, 27(1):111-133

[]{#_ENREF_19 .anchor}Dejean, Alain, Pascal Jean Solano, Julien Ayroles,
Bruno Corbara and Jérôme Orivel (2005), \"Insect behaviour: Arboreal
ants build traps to capture prey\". [Nature]{.underline}, 434:973

[]{#_ENREF_20 .anchor}Dickinson, Anthony and Bernard Balleine (1993),
\"Actions and Responses: the Dual Psychology of Behaviour\", in N.
Eilan, R. McCarthy and B. Brewer (eds.), *Spatial representation:
problems in philosophy and psychology*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

[]{#_ENREF_21 .anchor}\-\-- (2000), \"Causal Cognition and Goal-Directed
Action\", in C. Heyes and L. Huber (eds.), *The Evolution of Cognition*.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

[]{#_ENREF_22 .anchor}Frankfurt, Harry (1971), \"Freedom of the Will and
the Concept of a Person\". [The Journal of Philosophy]{.underline},
68(1):5-20

[]{#_ENREF_23 .anchor}Gergely, György and Gergely Csibra (2003),
\"Teleological reasoning in infancy: the na‹ve theory of rational
action\". [Trends in Cognitive Sciences]{.underline}, 7(7):287-292

[]{#_ENREF_24 .anchor}Gergely, György, Z. Nadasky, Gergely Csibra and S.
Biro (1995), \"Taking the Intentional Stance at 12 Months of Age\".
[Cognition]{.underline}, 56:165-193

[]{#_ENREF_25 .anchor}Gilbert, Margaret (1990), \"Walking Together: A
Paradigmatic Social Phenomenon\". [Midwest Studies in
Philosophy]{.underline}, 15:14

[]{#_ENREF_26 .anchor}\-\-- (1992), *On Social Facts.* Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press

[]{#_ENREF_27 .anchor}\-\-- (2006), \"Rationality in Collective
Action\". [Philosophy of the Social Sciences]{.underline}, 36(1):3-17

[]{#_ENREF_28 .anchor}Goebl, Werner and Caroline Palmer (2009),
\"Synchronization of Timing and Motion among Performing Musicians\".
[Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary Journal]{.underline},
26(5):427-438

[]{#_ENREF_29 .anchor}Gold, Natalie and Robert Sugden (2007a),
\"Collective Intentions and Team Agency\". [Journal of
Philosophy]{.underline}, 104(3):109-137

[]{#_ENREF_30 .anchor}\-\-- (2007b), \"Theories of team agency\", in F.
Peter and H. B. Schmid (eds.), *Rationality and Commitment*. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

[]{#_ENREF_31 .anchor}Gräfenhain, Maria, Tanya Behne, Malinda Carpenter
and Michael Tomasello (2009), \"Young Children's Understanding of Joint
Commitments\". [Developmental Psychology]{.underline}, 45(5):1430-1443

[]{#_ENREF_32 .anchor}Haggard, Patrick (1998), \"Planning of action
sequences\". [Acta Psychologica]{.underline}, 99(2):201-215

[]{#_ENREF_33 .anchor}Hawthorne, John O\'Leary (2004), *Knowledge and
Lotteries.* Oxford: Oxford University Press

[]{#_ENREF_34 .anchor}Helm, Bennett W. (2008), \"Plural Agents\".
[Nous]{.underline}, 42(1):17-49

[]{#_ENREF_35 .anchor}Hughes, Claire, Keiko K. Fujisawa, Rosie Ensor,
Serena Lecce and Rachel Marfleet (2006), \"Cooperation and conversations
about the mind: A study of individual differences in 2-year-olds and
their siblings\". [British Journal of Developmental
Psychology]{.underline}, 24(1):53-72

[]{#_ENREF_36 .anchor}Hursthouse, Roaslind (1991), \"Arational
Actions\". [The Journal of Philosophy]{.underline}, 88(2):57-68

[]{#_ENREF_37 .anchor}Knoblich, Guenther, Stephen Butterfill and Natalie
Sebanz (2010), \"Psychological research on joint action: Theory and
data\", in B. Ross (ed.) *Psychology of Learning and Motivation*, 51:
Academic Press.

[]{#_ENREF_38 .anchor}Knoblich, Guenther and Natalie Sebanz (2008),
\"Evolving Intentions for Social Interaction: from Entrainment to Joint
Action\". [Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B]{.underline}, 363:2021-2031

[]{#_ENREF_39 .anchor}Kovács, Ágnes Melinda, Ernő Téglás and Ansgar
Denis Endress (2010), \"The Social Sense: Susceptibility to Others'
Beliefs in Human Infants and Adults\". [Science]{.underline},
330(6012):1830-1834

[]{#_ENREF_40 .anchor}Kutz, Christopher (2000), \"Acting Together\".
[Philosophy and Phenomenological Research]{.underline}, 61(1):1-31

[]{#_ENREF_41 .anchor}Ludwig, Kirk (2007), \"Collective Intentional
Behavior from the Standpoint of Semantics\". [Nous]{.underline},
41(3):355-393

[]{#_ENREF_42 .anchor}Luo, Yuyan and Renée Baillargeon (2005), \"Can a
Self-Propelled Box Have a Goal?\". [Psychological Science]{.underline},
16(8):601-608

[]{#_ENREF_43 .anchor}Miller, Seamus (2001), *Social Action: A
Teleological Account.* Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

[]{#_ENREF_44 .anchor}Moll, Henrike and Michael Tomasello (2007),
\"Cooperation and human cognition: the Vygotskian Intelligence
Hypothesis\". [Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B]{.underline}, 362(1480):639-648

[]{#_ENREF_45 .anchor}Onishi, Kristine H. and Renée Baillargeon (2005),
\"Do 15-Month-Old Infants Understand False Beliefs?\".
[Science]{.underline}, 308(8):255-258

[]{#_ENREF_46 .anchor}Premack, David (1990), \"The infant\'s theory of
self-propelled objects\". [Cognition]{.underline}, 36(1):1-16

[]{#_ENREF_47 .anchor}Price, Carolyn (2001), *Functions in Mind.*
Oxford: Clarendon Press

[]{#_ENREF_48 .anchor}Richardson, Michael J., Walter L. Campbell and R.
C. Schmidt (2009), \"Movement interference during action observation as
emergent coordination\". [Neuroscience Letters]{.underline},
449(2):117-122

[]{#_ENREF_49 .anchor}Roth, Abraham Sesshu (2004), \"Shared Agency and
Contralateral Commitments\". [The Philosophical Review]{.underline},
113(3):359-410

[]{#_ENREF_50 .anchor}Schmidt, R. C., Paula Fitzpatrick, Robert Caron
and Joanna Mergeche (2010), \"Understanding social motor coordination\".
[Human Movement Science]{.underline}, In Press, Corrected Proof

[]{#_ENREF_51 .anchor}Searle, John R. (1983), *Intentionality: An Essay
in the Philosophy of Mind.* Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

[]{#_ENREF_52 .anchor}\-\-- (1990 \[2002\]), \"Collective Intentions and
Actions\", in *Consciousness and Language*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

[]{#_ENREF_53 .anchor}\-\-- (1994), *The Construction of Social
Reality.* New York: The Free Press

[]{#_ENREF_54 .anchor}Smith, Thomas H. (forthcoming), \"Playing One\'s
Part\". [Review of Philosophy and Psychology]{.underline}

[]{#_ENREF_55 .anchor}Sugden, Robert (2000), \"Team Preferences\".
[Economics and Philosophy]{.underline}, 16:175-204

[]{#_ENREF_56 .anchor}Surian, Luca, Stefania Caldi and Dan Sperber
(2007), \"Attribution of Beliefs by 13-Month-Old Infants\".
[Psychological Science]{.underline}, 18(7):580-586

[]{#_ENREF_57 .anchor}Tollefsen, Deborah (2005), \"Let\'s Pretend:
Children and Joint Action\". [Philosophy of the Social
Sciences]{.underline}, 35(75):74-97

[]{#_ENREF_58 .anchor}Tomasello, Michael (2008), *Origins of HUman
Communication.* Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press

[]{#_ENREF_59 .anchor}Tomasello, Michael and Malinda Carpenter (2007),
\"Shared Intentionality\". [Developmental Science]{.underline},
10(1):121-5

[]{#_ENREF_60 .anchor}Tomasello, Michael, Malinda Carpenter, Josep Call,
Tanya Behne and Henrike Moll (2005), \"Understanding and Sharing
Intentions: The Origins of Cultural Cognition\". [Behavioral and Brain
Sciences]{.underline}, 28:675-735

[]{#_ENREF_61 .anchor}Tomasello, Michael and Hannes Rakoczy (2003),
\"What Makes Human Cognition Unique? From Individual to Shared to
Collective Intentionality\". [Mind and Language]{.underline},
18(2):121-147

[]{#_ENREF_62 .anchor}Tuomela, Raimo (1995), *The Importance of Us: A
Philosophical Study of Basic Social Notions.* Stanford: Stanford
University Press

[]{#_ENREF_63 .anchor}Velleman, David (1997), \"How To Share An
Intention\". [Philosophy and Phenomenological Research]{.underline},
57(1):29-50

[]{#_ENREF_64 .anchor}\-\-- (2000), *The Possibility of Practical
Reason.* Oxford: Oxford University Press

[]{#_ENREF_65 .anchor}Vesper, Cordula, Stephen Butterfill, Guenther
Knoblich and Natalie Sebanz (2010), \"A Minimal Architecture for Joint
Action\". [Neural Networks]{.underline}, 23(8-9):998-1003

[]{#_ENREF_66 .anchor}Wellman, Henry, David Cross and Julanne Watson
(2001), \"Meta-analysis of Theory of Mind Development: The Truth about
False-Belief\". [Child Development]{.underline}, 72(3):655-684

[]{#_ENREF_67 .anchor}Wimmer, Heinz and Josef Perner (1983), \"Beliefs
about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children\'s understanding of deception\".
[Cognition]{.underline}, 13:103-128

[]{#_ENREF_68 .anchor}Woodward, Amanda L. (1998), \"Infants Selectively
Encode the Goal Object of an Actor\'s Reach\". [Cognition]{.underline},
69:1-34

[]{#_ENREF_69 .anchor}Woodward, Amanda L. and Jessica A. Sommerville
(2000), \"Twelve-Month-Old Infants Interpret Action in Context\".
[Psychological Science]{.underline}, 11(1):73-77

[]{#_ENREF_70 .anchor}Wright, Larry (1976), *Teleological Explanations.*
Berkeley: University of California Press

[^1]: Other notable contributions not discussed in this paper due to
    lack of space include Searle ([1990 \[2002\]](#_ENREF_52)), Gilbert
    ([2006](#_ENREF_27)), Tuomela ([1995](#_ENREF_62)), Sugden
    ([2000](#_ENREF_55)) and Gold and Sugden ([2007a](#_ENREF_29)), Kutz
    ([2000](#_ENREF_40)) and Roth ([2004](#_ENREF_49)).

[^2]: Bratman ([1999 \[1997\]: 142](#_ENREF_12)). See Bratman ([1992:
    338-9](#_ENREF_10)) for further details on the relation between
    shared intentions and shared intentional activities.

[^3]: In ([1993](#_ENREF_11)), Bratman offered the following as jointly
    sufficient *and individually necessary* conditions; the retreat to
    sufficient conditions only occurs in Bratman ([1999 \[1997\]:
    143-4](#_ENREF_12)) where he notes that "for all that I have said,
    shared intention might be multiply realizable."

[^4]: The most widely discussed propositional attitude has been belief;
    see ([Wimmer and Perner 1983](#_ENREF_67); [Wellman, Cross and
    Watson 2001](#_ENREF_66)) but also ([Onishi and Baillargeon
    2005](#_ENREF_45); [Surian, Caldi and Sperber 2007](#_ENREF_56);
    [Baillargeon, Scott and He 2010](#_ENREF_4); [Kovács, Téglás and
    Endress 2010](#_ENREF_39)). Apperly and Butterfill
    ([2009](#_ENREF_1)) argue for the possibility that while children in
    their first and second year have abilities to track beliefs, they
    cannot ascribe beliefs or other propositional attitudes as such.

[^5]: There is evidence that children of this age have difficulty
    understanding intentions ([Astington 1991](#_ENREF_2); [Astington
    and Gopnik 1991](#_ENREF_3)). A range of researchers have argued
    that infants form expectations about goal-directed activity
    ([Gergely, Nadasky*, et al.* 1995](#_ENREF_24); [Csibra
    2008](#_ENREF_17); [Woodward 1998](#_ENREF_68); [Woodward and
    Sommerville 2000](#_ENREF_69)). It may be that the understanding of
    goal-directed activity examined by these studies falls short of an
    understanding of intention.

[^6]: A related objection may apply to Claire Hughes' appeal to
    "reciprocal exchanges". She specifies that such exchanges "depend on
    ... modelling the other's intentions/desires (i.e. reflecting on the
    other's inner states) and monitoring the others' understanding of
    one's own intentions and desires (i.e. detecting mistaken beliefs
    about one's own inner states)" ([Hughes, Fujisawa*, et al.* 2006:
    56](#_ENREF_35)). Thus engaging in reciprocal exchanges appears to
    require fluid and sophisticated ascriptions of mental states.
    Accordingly, engaging in such exchanges cannot significantly explain
    how children develop abilities to think about minds.

[^7]: Tollefsen ([2005](#_ENREF_57)) objects to Bratman's account of
    shared intention on the grounds that it requires common knowledge.
    This objection also fails because common knowledge is explicitly
    required by what I am calling Bratman's substantial account only,
    which gives sufficient but not necessary conditions for shared
    intention. (A second potential problem for Tollefsen's argument is
    that it requires the premise that young children engage in joint
    actions of the kind Bratman's account aims to characterise, the kind
    whose paradigms involve coordinating potentially long-term plans.)

[^8]: Tollefsen ([2005](#_ENREF_57)) argues that Bratman's account of
    joint action is incorrect on the grounds that children engage in
    joint action but not in shared intentional activity as characterised
    by Bratman. The considerations below identify a missing premise in
    her argument.

[^9]: There may be other notions of joint action. For instance, Ludwig
    asserts that "\[t\]he concept of a joint action as such is just that
    of an event of which there are multiple agents" ([Ludwig 2007:
    366](#_ENREF_41)). As he notes, it is a straightforward consequence
    of this view that if there are joint actions then there are joint
    actions without shared intentions.

[^10]: This is suggested by Velleman's ([2000: 10-30](#_ENREF_64))
    discussion of 'purposeful activity'.

[^11]: This intuition provides a loose connection between the notion of
    shared goals and Miller's notion of a collective end ([Miller
    2001](#_ENREF_43)). While it would be useful to discuss differences
    and similarities in substance and motivation, there is no space to
    do that here.

[^12]: The 'on balance' qualification in conditions (c) and (d) rules
    out cases where agents do have the specified expectations about
    goals and outcomes but also have further, conflicting expectations
    which outweigh them.

[^13]: On goals as functions of actions see, for example, Wright
    ([1976](#_ENREF_70)) and Price ([2001](#_ENREF_47)). A variety of
    research supports the claim that young children, non-human primates
    and corvids track the functions of things (including Rakoczy and
    Tomasello 2007; Casler and Kelemen 2007; Csibra and Gergely 2007;
    Kelemen 1999; German and Defeyter 2000; Hauser 1997; Emery and
    Clayton 2004). On the abilities of these groups to represent goals
    specifically, see further footnote 5 on page [7](#_Ref160455442)
    above.

[^14]: This view is endorsed by Bratman ([1993: 103](#_ENREF_11)) and
    rejected by Ludwig ([2007: 387-8](#_ENREF_41)).

[^15]: This example is can be modelled as a Hawk-Dove game and is
    adapted from a discussion of Gold and Sugden ([2007b:
    304-8](#_ENREF_30)). As these authors note, the combination of
    actions is not a rational consequence of team reasoning ([on team
    reasoning see Sugden 2000](#_ENREF_55)) and so does not involve the
    associated notion of group agency ([Gold and Sugden
    2007a](#_ENREF_29)).

[^16]: Knoblich and Sebanz claim that lifting the basket together
    requires "joint intentionality" which in turn requires shared
    intentions in roughly Bratman's sense: "\[t\]here needs to be an
    intentional structure that allows an actor to relate his/her own
    intention and the other's intention to an intention that drives the
    joint activity" ([2008: 2025](#_ENREF_38)). I reject this claim for
    the reasons given above.
