# A Question about Acting Together {#sec:new_introduction}

People walk, build, paint and otherwise act together with a purpose in
myriad ways. Minimally, our acting together with a purpose requires that
there be some sense in which we are acting together, and also an outcome
to which our actions are directed. But this is not quite enough to
capture what we want. To see why not, consider a contrast involving a
long drain which is blocked:

> CASE 1: Ayesha and Beatrice live at different ends of the drain. By
> chance, they are simultaneously attempting to unblock it with drain
> rods. Although neither's efforts would have been sufficient, the
> common effect of their actions is sufficient vibration and disturbance
> to clear the blockage.
>
> CASE 2: ... is exactly like CASE 1 except that it is not by chance but
> by agreement that Ayesha and Beatrice are simultaneously attempting to
> unblock the drain; moreover, they expect that blockage to be removed
> as a common effect of their actions.

In both cases we can say that Ayesha and Beatrice unblocked the drain
together---after all, neither of them alone was doing quite enough to
move the blockage.[^1] Further, there is a single outcome, the
unblocking, to which each of their actions are directed. Yet we aim to
exclude the first case and include the second only. This can be done by
imposing a further requirement: where we act together with a purpose,
there must be an outcome to which our actions are directed and this
cannot be, or cannot only be, a matter of each action being directed to
it. To save words, we stipulate that in such cases our actions are
*collectively directed* to the outcome.

These minimal requirements on acting together with a purpose are weaker
than those commonly assumed in discussions of acting together for they
involve neither psychological mechanisms such as shared intentions
(contrast [(Bratman 1992)]{.citation cites="Bratman:1992mi"}) nor
normative structures (contrast [(Gilbert 2013)]{.citation
cites="gilbert:2014_book"}); nor do they invoke any novel kind of
reasoning ([(Gold and Sugden 2007)]{.citation cites="Gold:2007zd"}) or
subject ([(Helm 2008)]{.citation cites="helm_plural_2008"}). [^2]
Despite this, there is at least one question which can be brought into
view without relying on anything more than the minimal requirements.

To see this question, recall the contrast above. Given that actions are
events, there is no special mystery about how the actions we perform can
collectively have effects such as unblocking a drain: this is just a
matter of events having common effects. By contrast, it is less obvious
how our actions could be directed to unblocking the drain without this
being merely a matter of each action being individually directed to that
outcome. When we act together with a purpose, in virtue of what are the
actions we perform collectively directed to outcomes?

This question is parallel to one about ordinary individual actions and
the outcomes to which they are directed. Some have argued that the
directedness of ordinary, individual actions to outcomes depends not
only on intention or knowledge or other familiar philosophical
paraphernalia but also other kinds of representations which are involved
in preparing and executing actions; in particular, something called
*motor representations* (see section
[2](#sec:acting_alone){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:acting_alone"}). Inspired by these arguments, and taking
the correctness of their conclusion as a premise, we shall consider
whether they can be generalised to acting together with a purpose. This
will involve four steps. The first step is to examine the possibility
that, when people act together with a purpose, the outcomes to which
their actions are collectively directed are sometimes represented
motorically. Recent discoveries suggest that this is indeed the case
(see section
[3](#sec:collective_goals_are_represented){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:collective_goals_are_represented"}). The second step is
to propose a conjecture: motor representations of outcomes can be
components of certain interagential structures, and these structures can
facilitate interpersonal coordination of actions around the represented
outcomes (see section [4](#sec:coordination){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:coordination"} where we first specify the interagential
structure). The third step is to show that the conjecture is
theoretically coherent and empirically motivated (see section
[5](#sec:two_objections){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:two_objections"}). The fourth step is to observe that the
conjecture implies an answer to our overall question: Sometimes when
people act together with a purpose, it is a certain interagential
structure of motor representations in virtue of which their actions are
collective directed to outcomes (see section
[6](#sec:collective_goals_motor_representations){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:collective_goals_motor_representations"}).

Our focus may seem unusual. There are rich discussions of commitment
[(Roth 2004; Gilbert 2013; Michael 2022)]{.citation
cites="Roth:2004ki gilbert:2014_book michael:2022_book"}, of shared
intention [(Bratman 2014; Searle 1990; Ludwig 2016)]{.citation
cites="bratman:2014_book Searle:1990em ludwig:2016_individual"}, of
knowledge [(Blomberg 2016; RÃ¶dl 2018; Roessler 2024; Satne
2020)]{.citation
cites="blomberg:2015_common rodl:2018_joint roessler:2020_plural satne:2020_practical"},
of norms [(Bicchieri 2016)]{.citation cites="bicchieri:2016_norms"}, of
awareness [(Schmid 2013)]{.citation cites="Schmid:2013_self"}, of
temporal coordination [(Issartel, Marin, and Cadopi 2007; Oullier et al.
2008)]{.citation cites="issartel:2007_unintended oullier:2008_social"},
of reasoning [(Gold and Sugden 2007; Sugden 2000; Pacherie
2013)]{.citation cites="Gold:2007zd Sugden:2000mw pacherie:2013_lite"},
and of agents [(Helm 2008)]{.citation cites="helm_plural_2008"}. By
contrast, despite a groundbreaking proposal [(Pacherie and Dokic
2006)]{.citation cites="Pacherie:2006dl"}, motor representation has been
widely ignored in philosophical discussions in this area. This may be
because philosophers assume motor representations play at most an
enabling role by coordinating actions. Our aim is to identify a more
central role for them in the story of acting together.

# Motor Representation in Acting Alone with a Purpose {#sec:acting_alone}

The aim of this paper is to argue that when acting together with a
purpose, the actions performed are sometimes collectively directed to an
outcome in virtue of a certain structure of motor representations. As a
starting point, let us outline, in barest detail, an established view
about motor representation in acting alone with a purpose. We shall
later argue that this view can be generalised to acting together.

Consider very small scale actions, such as playing a chord, dipping a
brush into a can of paint, placing a book on a shelf or cracking an egg.
[^3] Often enough, the early part of such an action carries information
about how the action will unfold. For example, in grasping a book (or
tall cylinder) you would probably hold its middle, which makes lifting
it less effortful. But if you are about to place the book on a high
shelf, you are more likely to grasp the book at one end, which makes
lifting it more awkward now but will later make placing it easier
[(Cohen and Rosenbaum 2004; Meyer, Wel, and Hunnius 2013)]{.citation
cites="cohen:2004_wherea meyer:2013_higher-order"}. For another
illustration, imagine you are a cook who needs to take an egg from its
box, crack it and put it (except for the shell) into a bowl ready for
beating into a carbonara sauce. How tightly you now need to grip the egg
depends, among other things, on the forces to which you will later
subject the egg in lifting it. It turns out that people reliably grip
objects such as eggs just tightly enough across a range of conditions in
which the optimal tightness of grip varies. How tightly you initially
grip the egg indicates your anticipated future hand and arm movements
(compare [(Kawato 1999)]{.citation cites="kawato:1999_internal"}).

This anticipatory control of grasp, like several other features of
action performance ([(see Rosenbaum 2009, chap. 1)]{.citation
cites="rosenbaum:2010_human"} for more examples), is not plausibly a
consequence of mindless physiology. It indicates that control of action
involves representations concerning how actions will unfold in the
future. These and other representations which characteristically play a
role in coordinating very small scale actions are labelled 'motor
representations'. [^4]

What do motor representations represent? An initially tempting view
would be that they represent sequences of bodily configurations and
joint displacements only. However there is a significant body of
evidence for the opposing view that some motor representations represent
outcomes to which purposive actions are directed, such as the placing of
a book or the breaking of an egg. These are outcomes which might, on
different occasions, involve very different bodily configurations and
joint displacements (see [(Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia 2010)]{.citation
cites="rizzolatti_functional_2010"} for a selective review). The
experiments providing such evidence typically involve a marker---such as
a pattern of neuronal firings, a motor evoked potential or a behavioural
performance profile---which allows sameness or difference of motor
representation to be distinguished. Such markers can be exploited to
show that the sameness and difference of motor representations is linked
to the sameness and difference of outcomes such as the grasping of a
particular object. This supports the view that some motor
representations represent outcomes other than sequences of bodily
configurations and joint displacements. [^5]

If some motor representations do indeed represent such outcomes, why
consider them to be motoric at all? Part of the answer concerns their
role in preparing and performing actions. [^6] Motor representations can
trigger processes which are like planning in some respects. These
processes are planning-like in that they involve starting with
representations of relatively distal outcomes and gradually filling in
details, resulting in motor representations whose contents can be
hierarchically arranged by the means--end relation [(Grafton and
Hamilton 2007)]{.citation cites="grafton:2007_evidence"}. Some processes
triggered by motor representations are also planning-like in that they
involve meeting constraints on the selection of means by which to bring
about one outcome that arise from the need to select means by which,
later, to bring about another outcome [(Rosenbaum et al.
2012)]{.citation cites="rosenbaum:2012_cognition"}. So motor processes
are planning-like both in that they involve computation of means--ends
relations and in that they involve satisfying relational constraints on
the selection of means.

Motor representations can be distinguished from intentions.
Future-directed intentions set problems for practical reasoning and are
subject to norms such as agglomeration. (In short, the norm of
agglomeration says it is a mistake to knowingly have several intentions
if it would be a mistake to knowingly have one large intention
agglomerating the several intentions; see [(Bratman 1987)]{.citation
cites="Bratman:1987xw"}). While there may be kinds of intention which
are unlike future-directed intentions, intentions of any kind are
inferentially and normatively integrated with future-directed intentions
(compare [(Bratman 1984, 379)]{.citation cites="Bratman:1984jr"};
[(Pacherie 2000, 403)]{.citation cites="pacherie:2000_content"}). By
contrast, motor representations are inferentially and normatively
isolated from future-directed intentions. To illustrate, consider again
the cook who is reaching for an egg to grasp and transport it. Her
actions are subject to two kinds of constraint. One kind is associated
with motor processes and representations, and is manifest in things such
as the end-state comfort effect (which concerns avoiding extreme joint
angles; [(Rosenbaum et al. 2012, 926)]{.citation
cites="rosenbaum:2012_cognition"}) and Fitt's law (which links speed and
accuracy). Another kind of constraint arises from her intentions and
beliefs, which in this case mean she needs to break the egg into the
sauce and not the similar-sized, conveniently positioned fruit bowl. If
motor representations and intentions were inferentially integrated, we
would expect a single process of practical reasoning to enable agents to
meet both kinds of constraint. But in fact practical reasoning rarely if
ever enables agents to meet constraints associated with motor processes
and representations [(compare Searle 1983, 151)]{.citation
cites="Searle:1983tx"}. This suggests that motor representations are
interestingly distinct from intentions, at least as intentions are
standardly conceived. [^7]

These reflections indicate that actions are sometimes directed to an
outcome in virtue of motor representations. For we have just seen that,
when you break an egg (for example), there may be a motor representation
in you of this outcome, the breaking of the egg, and that this motor
representation can trigger planning-like processes which coordinate your
actions and do so in such a way that, normally, such coordination would
facilitate the occurrence of the outcome represented. This ensures that
your actions are directed to the breaking of the egg. Motor
representations and processes are therefore sufficient for actions to be
directed to outcomes. [^8]

To summarise, motor representations characteristically play a role in
the coordination of very small scale actions. Some represent outcomes
such as the placing of a book or the breaking of an egg. They trigger
planning-like processes which ensure that sequences of very small scale
actions are coordinated around the outcomes represented motorically. And
despite resembling intentions in some ways, motor representations and
the processes in which they feature are distinct from intentions and
practical reasoning. All of this indicates that in some cases where
someone acts alone with a purpose, it is motor representations that link
her actions to outcomes. In what follows we aim to generalise this claim
to acting together with a purpose.

# Motor Representation in Acting Together with a Purpose {#sec:collective_goals_are_represented}

The first step is to examine the possibility that when people act
together with a purpose, outcomes to which their actions are
collectively directed are sometimes represented motorically. A variety
of findings jointly indicate that this is indeed the case.

Using simultaneous EEG measurements from a pair of interacting agents
performing complementary actions, [MÃ©noret et al. (2014)]{.citation
cites="Menoret:2013fk"} provided evidence that motor representations in
one agent may be affected by facts about another's actions or the
outcomes to which they are directed, even when these have no significant
effect on the kinematics of the agent's own actions. While this doesn't
quite show that an outcome to which both agents' actions are directed is
represented motorically (as [MÃ©noret et al. (2014)]{.citation
cites="Menoret:2013fk"} themselves note on p.Â 95), the finding does
indicate that some or other aspects of another's actions can be
represented motorically when interacting with them.

To take a step further, consider pianists who produce a chord in playing
a duet. There is evidence that, sometimes, in a pianist playing a duet,
monitoring and control of action involves representations not only of
the pianist's and her partner's individual contributions but also of the
chord that she and her partner are supposed to produce together [(Janeen
D. Loehr et al. 2013)]{.citation cites="loehr:2013_monitoring"}. This
indicates that, in some cases, where some agents' actions are
collectively directed to an outcome, this outcome is represented
motorically.

Further evidence for this view comes from a study exploiting the fact
that imitation facilitates motor responses [(Tsai, Sebanz, and Knoblich
2011)]{.citation cites="tsai:2011_groop_effect"}. Subjects were required
to imitate single key-presses performed by a counterpart. Each subject
sat next to a confederate who also had a counterpart and who, on
critical trials, either imitated her counterpart or, in another
condition, performed an action complementary to her counterpart's. The
experimenters asked whether subjects represented motorically only the
outcomes to which their own actions were individually directed, or
whether they also represented motorically outcomes to which their
actions and those of the confederate were, or could have been,
collectively directed. Where the former occurs, facts about the
confederate's task should not directly affect the subjects' actions:
imitation should facilitate performance in every case. By contrast,
where the latter occurs, subjects will only be imitating in conditions
in which the confederate's task is to do what her counterpart does. So
performance should vary systematically depending on which outcomes the
subject's and confederate's actions could be collectively directed to.
And this is what the findings revealed [(related evidence is provided by
Ramenzoni, Sebanz, and Knoblich 2014)]{.citation
cites="ramenzoni:2014_scaling"}.

While any of these studies can be interpreted in various ways, taken
together they provide at least enough evidence to justify treating as a
working hypothesis the view that there are motor representations of
outcomes to which the actions people perform in acting together with a
purpose could be collectively directed. [^9] But taking this hypothesis
seriously invites a question. What are those motor representations doing
there?

# Coordination in Acting Together: A Conjecture {#sec:coordination}

We conjecture that motor representations of outcomes to which actions
are collectively directed can enable interpersonal coordination. More
specifically, we conjecture that there are certain interagential
structures (specified below) which include these motor representations
and that, where some actions are collectively directed to these
outcomes, the structures can facilitate interpersonal coordination of
the actions around the outcomes. [^10] The next step in our overall
argument is to explain how this conjecture could be true.

Consider what is involved when, in acting alone, you move a mug from one
place to another, passing it between your hands half-way. In this action
there is a need to coordinate the exchange between your two hands. If
your action is fluid, you may proactively prepare to release the mug
from your left hand moments in advance of the mug's being secured by
your right hand [(compare Diedrichsen et al. 2003)]{.citation
cites="diedrichsen:2003_anticipatory"}. How is such tight coordination
achieved? A full answer cannot be given by appeal to physiology alone
[(Jackson, German, and Peacock 2002; Piedimonte et al. 2015)]{.citation
cites="jackson:2002_functional piedimonte:2015_invisible"}. Instead,
part of the answer involves the fact that there is a motor
representation for the whole action which triggers planning-like motor
processes, so that the motor representations and processes concerning
the actions involving each hand are not entirely independent of each
other (compare [(Kelso, Southard, and Goodman 1979)]{.citation
cites="kelso:1979_coordination"} and [(Rosenbaum 2009,
244--48)]{.citation cites="rosenbaum:2010_human"}). As we have seen (in
section [2](#sec:acting_alone){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:acting_alone"}), such planning-like processes result in
motor representations concerning different parts of the action which can
be hierarchically arranged by the means-ends relation and ensure that
relational constraints on components of the action are satisfied. So
when you move a mug from one place to another, passing it between your
hands half-way, and when this action and its components are represented
motorically in a plan-like hierarchy, it is this plan-like hierarchy
which ensures the movements of one hand constrain and are constrained by
the movements of the other hand.

Compare this individual action with a similar moving of the mug
performed by two agents acting together. One agent takes the mug and
passes it to the other, who then places it. This event is like the
individual action in two respects. There is a similar coordination
problem---the agents' two hands have to meet; and the outcome to which
their actions are collectively directed is the same, namely to move the
mug from here to there. Our working hypothesis is that, sometimes, when
acting together, this outcome, the movement of the mug from one place to
another, is represented in each agent motorically. Such motor
representations can trigger planning-like processes, so that in each
agent there will be motor representations somewhat like those that would
occur were she performing the whole action alone (compare [(Kourtis,
Sebanz, and Knoblich 2013; Kourtis et al. 2014; Meyer et al. 2011;
Meyer, Wel, and Hunnius 2013)]{.citation
cites="kourtis:2012_predictive kourtis:2014_attention meyer:2011_joint meyer:2013_higher-order"}).

But why should this support, rather than hinder, coordination? Suppose
that the agents' planning-like motor processes are sufficiently similar
that, in this context at least, they will nonaccidentally produce
matching plan-like hierarchies of motor representations in each agent.
For a plan-like hierarchy in an agent, let the *self part* be those
motor representations concerning the agent's own actions and let the
*other part* be the other motor representations. [^11] Then, just as in
the case where one agent moves the mug all by herself, the self part of
each agent's plan-like hierarchy (grasping and giving the mug with the
left hand, say) will be directly constrained by the other part of her
plan-like hierarchy (taking and placing the mug with the right hand,
say). But matching implies that the other part of her plan-like
hierarchy matches the self part of the other's plan-like hierarchy. This
ensures that the self part of her plan-like hierarchy will be indirectly
constrained by the self part of the other agent's plan-like hierarchy.
Thus, much as motor representations of outcomes can enable intrapersonal
coordination in acting alone, so also can matching structures of motor
representations enable interpersonal coordination when acting together.
Or so we conjecture.

The case just offered for this conjecture relies on an as yet
unspecified notion of *matching*. In the simplest case, plan-like
hierarchies of motor representations match if they are identical. But
matching does not require identity. It is sufficient that the
differences between two (or more) plan-like hierarchies of motor
representations don't matter in the following sense. First consider what
would happen if, for a particular agent, the other part of her plan-like
hierarchy were as nearly identical to the self part (or parts) of the
other's plan-like hierarchy (or others' plan-like hierarchies) as
psychologically possible. Would the agent's self part be different? If
not, let us say that any differences between her plan-like hierarchy and
the other's (or others') are *not relevant* for her. Finally, if for
some agents' plan-like hierarchies of motor representations the
differences between them are not relevant for any of the agents, then
let us say that the differences *don't matter*. Consider the condition
that the differences between plan-like hierarchies of motor
representations in two agents don't matter. Meeting this condition is
sufficient to support our proposed explanation of how motor
representations could enable interpersonal coordination. So even without
fully specifying how plan-like hierarchies in two (or more) agents must
be related if motor representations are to explain interpersonal
coordination, we can be sure that there are sufficient conditions for
such matching.

We can now describe an interagential structure of motor representations
capable of facilitating interpersonal coordination. This involves four
conditions. First, there must be an outcome to which the actions are, or
could be, collectively directed, and in each agent there must be a motor
representation of this outcome. Second, these motor representations must
trigger planning-like processes which result in plan-like hierarchies of
motor representations in each agent. Third, the plan-like hierarchy in
each agent must involve motor representations concerning not only
actions she will eventually perform but also actions another will
eventually perform. Fourth, the plan-like hierarchies of motor
representations in the agents must non-accidentally match. When all four
conditions are met, the result is an interagential structure of motor
representations.

As we have just seen, instances of this interagential structure could
coordinate actions performed by people acting together with a purpose in
something like the way that ordinary, individual hierarchies of motor
representations can coordinate actions performed by a person acting
alone with a purpose.

It is no part of our view that the need for interpersonal coordination
can always be met by this interagential structure of motor
representations. People acting together with a purpose may successfully
coordinate their actions around outcomes which are not represented
motorically. Suppose that Hannah puts slugs in Sara's shoes and Lucas
puts worms in her hat, where their actions are collectively directed to
freaking Sara out. (As they each know, Sara is so robust that finding
only slugs or only worms in her clothing would barely perturb her.) Now
let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that freaking Sara out isn't
an outcome that is represented motorically on this occasion. So Hannah's
and Lucas' actions could not be coordinated around this outcome by
virtue of motor representations of it. However, their acting together
may well involve them passing objects between them, reaching in a
coordinated way, and one holding the hat while the other drops worms
into it. Such very small scale actions are the sort most plausibly
coordinated by the interagential structure of motor representations we
have identified.

Is there any empirical motivation for our conjecture that certain
interagential structures of motor representations can enable
interpersonal coordination? Contrast acting together with a purpose and
acting in parallel but merely alone. Even where these two require the
same joint displacements and bodily configurations, the conjecture we
have just introduced implies that they can differ motorically: acting
together with a purpose, unlike acting in parallel, provides reason to
expect that there will be motor representations concerning another's
action in each agent. [della Gatta et al. (2017)]{.citation
cites="dellagatta:2017_drawn"} set out to test just this prediction and
found some evidence for it (as we discuss in [(Sinigaglia and Butterfill
2020, 189)]{.citation cites="sinigaglia:2020_motor_joint_experience"}).
A further test of the prediction is provided by [Clarke et al.
(2019)]{.citation cites="clarke:2019_joint"}, who use an entirely
different paradigm. And although they do not frame it in our terms, the
results of [Sacheli, Arcangeli, and Paulesu (2018)]{.citation
cites="sacheli:2018_evidence"} can also be interpreted as supporting the
conjecture. Further, less direct evidence for the conjecture is provided
by some earlier studies including [Kourtis, Sebanz, and Knoblich (2013;
Kourtis et al. 2014; Meyer et al. 2011)]{.citation
cites="kourtis:2012_predictive kourtis:2014_attention meyer:2011_joint"}.

While more evidence would be needed for us to know that the conjecture
is true, it is clearly precise enough to generate readily testable (and
actually tested) predictions and there is already enough evidence to
motivate considering it as a candidate for truth. But there are also
theoretical objections to the conjecture.

# Two Objections {#sec:two_objections}

The conjecture we have just provided evidence for is that motor
representations can enable interpersonal coordination. Or, more
accurately: motor representations of outcomes can be components of
certain interagential structures (specified in section
[4](#sec:coordination){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:coordination"}), and, where some actions are collectively
directed to these outcomes, the structures can facilitate interpersonal
coordination of the actions around the outcomes.

In this section we reply to two objections to our conjecture's
theoretical coherence. The first objection concerns what is represented
motorically, whereas the second hinges on considerations about the
direction of fit of motor representation.

There are limits on which outcomes can be represented motorically. Some
such limits are linked to peculiarities of the agent in which the motor
representation occurs, and, in particular, to the range of actions she
can perform. For example, whether the grasping of a particular object
can be represented motorically may depend in part on whether the agent
can reach it [(Costantini et al. 2010, 2011)]{.citation
cites="costantini:2010_where costantini:2011_tool"}. Doesn't this make
it incoherent for us to conjecture that, without any relevant ignorance
or irrationality, there are motor representations concerning actions
another will perform? After all, no agent can perform another's
actions---at least not in the cases we are primarily concerned with.
[^12]

In replying to this first objection it is helpful to invoke the notion
of agent-neutrality. By saying that a representation is *agent-neutral*,
we mean that its content does not specify any particular agent or
agents. It is plausible that some motor processes involve agent-neutral
representations of outcomes [(Ramsey and Hamilton 2010)]{.citation
cites="ramsey:2010_understanding"}. Indeed, that some motor
representations are agent-neutral is implied by Jeannerod's argument for
the view that motor representations concerning your own actions are
'entangled' with motor representations concerning others' actions in
such a way that knowing which actions are yours requires the two to be
disentangled. [^13]

The agent-neutrality of some motor representations allows us to clarify
what is involved in one agent having motor representations concerning
another's actions. The first agent does represent outcomes to which the
other's actions are, or will be, directed; and, normally, these
representations occur in part because the other's actions are, or will
be, directed to these outcomes. But the contents of these
representations, which are agent-neutral, do not specify the other (or
the self) as the agent. It follows that an action's having someone other
than you as its agent is not necessarily a barrier to the occurrence in
you of motor representations concerning that action.

The first objection concerned content. A second objection concerns
direction of fit. It may seem that our conjecture entails that there is
a single kind of representation, motor representation, different
instances of which have different directions of fit. Apparently, some
are world-to-mind insofar as they are supposed to lead to performing
actions, while others are mind-to-world insofar as they are supposed to
enable predictions of others' actions.

This objection arises because of a point of contrast between intention
and motor representation. On some accounts ([(Bratman 2014)]{.citation
cites="bratman:2014_book"}'s, for instance), two agents' having a shared
intention involves each of them having knowledge of the other's
intentions. They do not, of course, intend actions the other will
perform (at least not on many accounts; but see [(Roth 2004)]{.citation
cites="Roth:2004ki"}). By contrast, where motor representations are
involved in enabling interpersonal coordination, the conjecture under
consideration is that in each agent there are motor representations
concerning actions that she will eventually perform and also motor
representations---not knowledge of motor representations but actual
motor representations---concerning actions that another will eventually
perform. So because our conjecture involves saying that there is just
one kind of representation here, it appears to entail that different
instances of a single attitude can have different directions of fit:
some are world-to-mind, others are mind-to-world. But this is arguably
incoherent. [^14] So the second objection. [^15]

As a preliminary to replying to the second objection, consider an
analogy. There is a rotary dial on your oven which enables you to
initiate and control the oven's activity. We might think of the dial as
having an oven-to-instrument direction of fit: the oven temperature is
supposed to adjust to the setting on the dial. But now suppose, further,
that there is an indicator light on your oven which is illuminated
unless the oven has reached the temperature specified by the dial. This
enables you to use the dial to discover the temperature of the oven: if
the light is on, you turn the dial down until just the point where the
light goes off. Now the setting on the dial tells you the temperature of
the oven. So we might think of the dial as having an instrument-to-oven
direction of fit.

This analogy will guide our response to the second objection. The key
point can be put like this. There is a core system featuring the dial,
thermostat, heating element and oven. Relative to this core system, the
dial always has an oven-to-instrument direction of fit. However, there
is a larger system which embeds the core system and exploits it for
novel ends. This larger system includes you and your capacity to
temporarily prevent significant changes in the temperature of the oven
(perhaps by moving the dial between settings too quickly for the heating
element to respond). Relative to this larger system the dial has an
instrument-to-oven direction of fit. So to understand the dial's
functions, we do need two directions of fit, oven-to-instrument and
instrument-to-oven. But this is not quite to say that the dial has both
directions of fit. For something has a direction of fit only relative to
a particular system. Which direction of fit we see depends on which
system we are considering. Understanding the dial does not require
supposing that anything has two directions of fit relative to a single
system.

Our response to the second objection is similar. If we consider
planning-like motor processes only (the core system), then each motor
representation's function is linked to initiating and controlling
action. From this perspective, only a world-to-mind direction of fit is
in view. But these planning-like motor processes can occur in the
context of a larger system, one which involves something that somehow
prevents performance of action. The functions of this larger system
concern predicting which outcomes actions will be directed to. If we
consider this larger system, it is natural to describe the motor
representations as having a mind-to-world direction of fit. So, as in
our analogy, which direction of fit we see depends on which system we
are considering. Our reply to the second objection, then, is that our
conjecture involves no incoherence when properly understood.

# How Are Actions Linked to Outcomes when Acting Together? {#sec:collective_goals_motor_representations}

Our discussion so far has concerned the coordination of actions people
perform when acting together with a purpose. How is this relevant to our
opening question, which is about understanding in virtue of what actions
performed in acting together with a purpose can be collectively directed
to outcomes?

The interagential structure of motor representations we identified can
be used in linking actions to outcomes. For some (but not all) cases in
which people act together with a purpose, we can explain in virtue of
what their actions are collectively directed to an outcome by invoking
this interagential structure of motor representations. To see how this
works, consider first how accounts of shared intention suggest a way of
linking actions to outcomes. On at least some accounts of shared
intention, [^16] shared intentions relate things we do together to
actual or possible outcomes. Suppose we have a shared intention that we
move the piano. Then, on these accounts, our having a shared intention
consists in part in each of us intending that we, you and I, move the
piano, or in each of us being in some other state which specifies this
outcome. The shared intention also provides for the coordination of our
actions (so that, for example, you don't attempt to take one route while
I pursue another). And coordination of this type would normally
facilitate occurrences of the type of outcome intended. When people act
together with a purpose, this is one way of explicating what it is for
their actions to be collectively directed to an outcome. But the
interagential structure of motor representations we identified can be
used in giving an alternative, structurally parallel explication. For,
as we specified in section [4](#sec:coordination){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:coordination"}, this interagential structure involves
there being a single outcome such that there is a representation in each
agent of this outcome, and these representations provide for
coordination of the agents' actions where coordination of this type
would normally facilitate occurrences of outcomes of this type. It is
therefore possible to link actions to outcomes by appeal to this
interagential structure of motor representations.

The result of our investigation implies that this is not merely
possible: sometimes it is actually in virtue of a certain interagential
structure of motor representation that two or more agents' actions are
collectively directed to an outcome.

Some may attempt to resist this conclusion on the grounds that the
interagential structure of motor representations identified in section
[4](#sec:coordination){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:coordination"} is not something other than shared
intention, but simply one kind of shared intention. To see that this is
false, consider that shared intentions, whatever exactly they turn out
to be, are inferentially and normatively integrated with ordinary,
individual intentions. To illustrate, tonight there is a party and a
ceremony. It is impossible for anyone to attend both, and this is common
knowledge among Lily and Isabel. They have a shared intention that they
attend the ceremony together. But while having this shared intention,
Isabel also intends to go to the party. Given their common knowledge,
this combination of shared and individual intentions is irrational. Its
irrationality is related to that which might be involved in Isabel
individually intending to attend the ceremony while also individually
intending to go to the party. By contrast, as already mentioned (see
section [2](#sec:acting_alone){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:acting_alone"}), motor representations are not
inferentially or normatively integrated with intentions: they do not
feature in practical reasoning, nor in any inferences in which
intentions also feature; and if there are any normative requirements
linking the contents of intentions with the contents of motor
representations at all, these are distinct from those governing
intentions. So even where the actions of agents who are acting together
are collectively directed to outcomes in virtue of an interagential
structure of motor representations, the occurrence of this structure in
the agents does not amount to their having a shared intention.

A basic requirement on any account of acting together with a purpose is
that it explain in virtue of what actions performed in acting together
are collectively directed to outcomes. The interagential structure of
motor representation we have identified is needed to explain this. Motor
representation must therefore feature in any adequate account of acting
together with a purpose. [^17]

# Conclusion

We started by asking, When people act together with a purpose, in virtue
of what are their actions collectively directed to an outcome? Our
answer is that this is sometimes a matter of a certain interagential
structure of motor representations being realised and playing a role in
coordinating the actions (see section
[6](#sec:collective_goals_motor_representations){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:collective_goals_motor_representations"} for the
conjecture; the interagential structure is specified in section
[4](#sec:coordination){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:coordination"}). How did we arrive at this answer? We
first identified evidence supporting the hypothesis that when people act
together with a purpose, outcomes to which their actions are
collectively directed are sometimes represented motorically (see section
[3](#sec:collective_goals_are_represented){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:collective_goals_are_represented"}). This allowed us to
make a conjecture about how motor representations of such outcomes
facilitate interpersonal coordination (see section
[4](#sec:coordination){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:coordination"}). Sometimes these motor representations
trigger processes in each agent which result in matching plan-like
hierarchies concerning not only actions to be performed by the agent
herself but also actions that another will eventually perform. These
matching hierarchies realise an interagential structure that could
facilitate coordination of the actions performed by people acting
together with a purpose. This conjecture is theoretically coherent and
empirically motivated (see section
[5](#sec:two_objections){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:two_objections"}). It suggests a way of generalising a
view about acting alone with a purpose to cases of acting together with
a purpose. When an agent acts alone with a purpose, sometimes it is
motor representations that ground the directedness of her actions to an
outcome. Similarly, we argued (in section
[6](#sec:collective_goals_motor_representations){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:collective_goals_motor_representations"}), when agents
act together with a purpose, their actions are sometimes collectively
directed to an outcome in virtue of an interagential structure of motor
representations.

[^1]: Gilbert and Tuomela each use the term 'acting together' as if it
    applied far more narrowly (compare [Tuomela (2000, 7)]{.citation
    cites="tuomela:2000_cooperation"}: 'Acting together involves
    sociality in the relatively strong sense that such action must be
    based on joint intention or shared collective goal.'). We take this
    to be a terminological issue. Just as it is coherent to say that the
    three legs of a tripod support a flask together, so it seems to us
    coherent to say that people vibrating and disturbing a fatberg are
    unblocking the drain together.

[^2]: Endorsing these minimal requirements does not imply that they are
    sufficient. Accordingly, we are neutral on whether any of the
    researchers just cited may be sources of further necessary
    requirements.

[^3]: In general, a *very small scale action* is one that is typically
    distantly related as a descendent by the means-ends relation to the
    actions which are sometimes described as 'small scale' actions, such
    as playing a sonata, cooking a meal or painting a house (e.g.
    [(Bratman 2014, 8)]{.citation cites="bratman:2014_book"}; [(Gilbert
    1990, 178)]{.citation cites="gilbert_walking_1990"}). It is
    sometimes suggested that standard accounts of acting together are
    ill-suited to characterising large-scale interactions [(e.g. Kutz
    2000)]{.citation cites="Kutz:2000si"}. They may also fail to
    characterise very small-scale interactions.

[^4]: Much more could be said about what motor representations are and
    why they are necessary; key sources include [Rosenbaum
    (2009)]{.citation cites="rosenbaum:2010_human"}, [Prinz
    (1990)]{.citation cites="prinz:1990_cc"}, [Wolpert, Ghahramani, and
    Jordan (1995)]{.citation cites="wolpert:1995internal"}, [Jeannerod
    (1988)]{.citation cites="jeannerod:1988_neural"} and [Rizzolatti and
    Sinigaglia (2008)]{.citation cites="rizzolatti_mirrors_2008"}.
    Related theoretical considerations have also been identified by
    philosophers, notably by [Bach (1978)]{.citation
    cites="bach:1978_representational"} on 'executive representations'.

[^5]: For further supporting considerations, see [Prinz (1997,
    143--46)]{.citation cites="prinz:1997_perception"}, [Pacherie
    (2008)]{.citation cites="pacherie:2008_action"} and [Butterfill and
    Sinigaglia (2014, 121--24)]{.citation
    cites="butterfill:2012_intention"}.

[^6]: Another part of the answer concerns the role of motor
    representation of outcomes in reducing the number of kinematic
    parameters to be computed, which facilitates planning and control of
    action (see, for example, [(Santello, Flanders, and Soechting
    2002)]{.citation cites="santello:2002_patterns"}; [(Tessitore,
    Sinigaglia, and Prevete 2013)]{.citation
    cites="tessitore:2013_hierarchical"}).

[^7]: Full discussion of the distinction between intention and motor
    representation is beyond the scope of this paper. [Butterfill and
    Sinigaglia (2014, 124--30)]{.citation
    cites="butterfill:2012_intention"} offer some further
    considerations. See further [Pacherie (2000, 2011; Shepherd
    2015)]{.citation
    cites="pacherie:2000_content pacherie:2011_nonconceptual shepherd:2015_conscious"}.

[^8]: Note that this conclusion is neutral on whether all actions
    involve intentions. After all, a single action may involve both
    intention and motor representation [(Butterfill and Sinigaglia
    2014)]{.citation cites="butterfill:2012_intention"}.

[^9]: Further relevant findings include [Janeen D. Loehr and Vesper
    (2015; Novembre et al. 2014)]{.citation
    cites="loehr:2015_sound novembre:2013_motor"}.

[^10]: Far from being entirely novel, this conjecture is a version of
    [Pacherie and Dokic (2006, 111)]{.citation
    cites="Pacherie:2006dl"}'s view that in 'joint action control
    \[...\] each agent adjusts his own actions as a function of the
    common goal and of the predicted consequences of the actions of
    other participants.' Related ideas can also be found in [della Gatta
    et al. (2017; Sacheli, Arcangeli, and Paulesu 2018; Clarke et al.
    2019)]{.citation
    cites="dellagatta:2017_drawn sacheli:2018_evidence clarke:2019_joint"}.

[^11]: This should not be taken to imply that the motor representations
    themselves specify self or other (see further section
    [5](#sec:two_objections){reference-type="ref"
    reference="sec:two_objections"}).

[^12]: A version of this objection is due to Wolfgang Prinz (personal
    communication).

[^13]: See [Jeannerod (2003)]{.citation
    cites="jeannerod:2003_mechanism"}. For arguments for the
    agent-neutrality of some motor representations, see also [Gallese
    (2001)]{.citation cites="gallese:2001_shared"} and [Pacherie and
    Dokic (2006)]{.citation cites="Pacherie:2006dl"}.

[^14]: Not everyone appears to find this incoherent [(Millikan 1995,
    191)]{.citation cites="millikan:1995_pushmi-pullyu"}; but we shall
    concede that it is incoherent for the sake of argument.

[^15]: This objection is due to Michael Bratman (personal
    communication).

[^16]: The following is true on accounts offered by [Bratman
    (1993)]{.citation cites="Bratman:1993je"}, [Alonso (2009)]{.citation
    cites="alonso_shared_2009"} and [Pacherie (2013)]{.citation
    cites="pacherie:2013_lite"}; and it is consistent with [Searle
    (1990)]{.citation cites="Searle:1990em"} and [Kutz (2000)]{.citation
    cites="Kutz:2000si"} among others.

[^17]: Note that this claim is consistent with (and neutral on) the view
    that shared intention is involved in every case of acting together
    with a purpose. Our aim is to argue that an interagential structure
    of motor representation is needed rather than that shared intention
    is not needed.

    [Sinigaglia and Butterfill (2020)]{.citation
    cites="sinigaglia:2020_motor_joint_experience"} propose a further,
    independent reason for thinking that motor representation matters:
    it may ground experiences of acting together with a purpose which
    are not merely experiences of individual actions.
