## Do humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like states?

### Abstract

The lack of consensus on how to characterize humans' capacity for belief
reasoning has been brought into sharp focus by recent research. Children
fail critical tests of belief reasoning before 3 to 4 years , yet
infants apparently pass false belief tasks at 13 or 15 months .
Non-human animals also fail critical tests of belief reasoning but can
show very complex social behaviour (e.g., Call & Tomasello, 2005).
Fluent social interaction in adult humans implies efficient processing
of beliefs, yet direct tests suggest that belief reasoning is
cognitively demanding, even for adults (e.g., Apperly, Samson &
Humphreys, 2005). We interpret these findings by drawing an analogy with
the domain of number cognition, where similarly contrasting results have
been observed. We propose that the success of infants and non-human
animals on some belief reasoning tasks may be best explained by a
cognitively efficient but inflexible capacity for tracking belief-like
states. In humans this capacity persists in parallel with
later-developing, more flexible but more cognitively demanding theory of
mind abilities.

### Introduction

More than twenty five years of research has taught us a great deal about
theory of mind, the ability to ascribe mental states such as beliefs,
desires and intentions in order to explain, predict and justify
behaviour. We have learned much about the age at which children reach
developmental milestones, about the abilities of non-human animals,
about the disruption of theory of mind in developmental disorders such
as autism or following brain injury, and about the neural systems
involved when people engage in this kind of thinking. However, we seem
no nearer to reaching any consensus on the cognitive basis of theory of
mind abilities, or even of specific aspects of theory of mind, such as
the paradigm case of belief ascriptions. One reason for this is that
dominant accounts aim to explain the development of theory of mind, or
to characterise theory of mind in non-human animals. They give much less
consideration to how inferences about mental states are achieved for the
wide range of everyday functions that theory of mind is supposed to
support.

A central contention in the account we develop here is that theory of
mind abilities are subject to competing demands for efficient and
flexible processing. On the one hand theory of mind abilities need to be
fast enough to guide competitive and cooperative activities in rapidly
changing circumstances and efficient enough not to consume cognitive
resources necessary for the primary task of competition or cooperation.
On the other hand, theory of mind abilities in human adults need to be
as flexible as any reasoning abilities in order to support the explicit
explanation and prediction of action that is involved in jurisprudence,
strategic negotiation, self-awareness and understanding one's relations
to other thinking agents .

Competition between demands for efficient and flexible processing is
reflected in a fundamental disagreement concerning belief ascription
which dates back to some of the earliest papers on theory of mind. To
one way of thinking, belief ascriptions depend on one or more modules,
whose operation is fast and efficient and whose fundamental conceptual
and processing structures are fixed before or during infancy . The
alternative view is that the ability to ascribe beliefs depends upon
flexible but effortful general reasoning abilities, plus knowledge
learned during children's early childhood about what beliefs are, the
conditions for their formation, and the role they play in cognition .
These alternatives imply very different and incompatible views about the
nature of belief ascription, and about the relationships between belief
ascription and other cognitive processes. The conflict between these
views is brought into focus by recent research on belief reasoning in
infants, and it is with these developmental findings that we will begin.
However, the same tensions exist when considering the abilities of
non-human animals and human adults, which we discuss in later sections.
We will argue that both current views of belief ascription have
significant evidence in their favour, and that neither is likely to be
fully correct. Instead we advocate a view based on lessons from another
domain, number cognition: the competing demands of efficient and
flexible processing are solved by having two systems^1^.

Our central conjecture, that theory of mind involves two systems, has
been canvassed in general terms by a variety of theorists with otherwise
very different convictions , Tager-Flusberg & Sullivan, 2000; Suddendorf
& Whitten, 2003). However, it has not been developed in any detail for
the case of belief reasoning that occupies such a central position in
research on theory of mind. In the current paper we examine the
cognitive demands of belief reasoning, develop the hypothesis that
meeting these demands requires two kinds of cognitive system, we
evaluate this hypothesis in the light of converging evidence from
infants, adults, and non-humans, and identify the possible future
evidence that could distinguish between alternative two-system
solutions. Our project of characterising the cognitive basis of belief
reasoning has implications for all of the subject areas where theory of
mind has been investigated, including typical and atypical development
(e.g., Baron-Cohen, Tager-Flusberg & Cohen, 2000; Doherty, 2008; Wellman
et al., 2001), cognitive psychology (e.g., Apperly, Samson & Humphreys,
2009; German & Hehman, 2006; Keysar, Lin & Barr, 2003), cognitive
neuroscience (e.g., Apperly, Samson & Humphreys, 2005; Frith & Frith,
2003; Saxe, Carey & Kanwisher, 2004) and comparative psychology (e.g.,
Call & Tomasello, 2008; Penn, Holyoak & Povinelli, 2008).

*The development of belief reasoning.*

Reasoning about beliefs and other mental states has a protracted
developmental course, in which the acquisition of a conventional
linguistic system for describing different mental states and structuring
their content appears to play a critical role .  One important and
much-studied benchmark in this development is the ability to understand
false beliefs.  Children do not typically succeed on standard false
belief tasks until around 4 years of age ^\ 2^. Further developments in
children\'s theory of mind abilities occur later still.  For example,
children do not succeed until 5 or 6 years of age on tasks that require
recognition that beliefs only represent a subset of the features of
their referents, .\
However, there is evidence that 2- and 3-year-old children, who fail
standard false belief tasks, may be aware of false beliefs.  For
example, Garnham and colleagues asked 3-year-old children where Sam will
look for some cheese which was secretly moved while he was sleeping. 
Although the 3-year-olds incorrectly said that Sam will look where the
cheese actually is, they nevertheless appear to show some awareness of
false beliefs by looking at the location where a character believes some
cheese is hidden when prompted by with 'I wonder where he's going to
look' .  Using a modified, non-verbal version of Garnham's procedure,
Southgate and colleagues have shown similar looking behaviour in
2-year-olds which is also indicative of false belief understanding^3^.

Most strikingly, Onishi & Baillargeon (2005) provided evidence that
15-month-old infants understand that others can have false beliefs by
using a violation-of-expectation paradigm.  In one condition infants
were shown the following sequence of events: a watermelon slice is
placed into a green box while an actor watches; then the actor's view is
blocked as the watermelon slice moves to a yellow box (so the actor's
belief becomes false); finally, the actor reappears and reaches into one
of the boxes.  Infants looked significantly longer at the display when
the actor reached into the yellow box than when the actor reached into
the green box.  The opposite pattern of looking was found in another
condition where the actor observed the watermelon's movement (so had a
true belief).  This and other control conditions suggest that infant's
looking times may correlate with whether or not the actor acts in
accordance with her beliefs.  Related results have since been
independently obtained with 13-month-olds ^4^.

There have been two main lines of response to the evidence that infants
are aware of false beliefs.  Some authors argue that infants understand
false belief; they therefore deny that there is a fundamental change at
around four years when children first pass standard measures of false
belief (Onishi & Baillargeon 2005; Leslie 2005), and insist that
infants\' early false belief understanding provides the \"conceptual
foundation\" for later abilities to reason about false beliefs . 
Opposing this view, others insist that apparent success on theory of
mind tasks in infancy can be explained without supposing infants have
any understanding of belief at all.  For example, some suggest infants'
looking times may be explained by their adopting behavioural rules such
as 'people look for objects where they last set eyes on them' (Perner &
Ruffman 2005, p.214; Ruffman & Perner 2005, p.462).

How might this conflict be decided?  Both sides claim that parsimony
favours their position (Onishi & Baillargeon 2005, p.257; Perner &
Ruffman 2005, p.214).  This suggests that considerations of parsimony
will not be decisive.  In our view both sides of this conflict are
mistaken, but progress can be made by taking a broader perspective on
the abilities of infants, taking into account the cognitive limitations
of infants, and the abilities of non-human animals and human adults. Our
first step is to draw a lesson from the case of number cognition, where
there is also an apparent discrepancy between precocious abilities in
infants and persisting difficulties in older children, and where taking
a broader perspective on infants' abilities has significantly advanced
our understanding of number cognition in general.

### Number cognition

In this section we summarise the evidence suggesting that humans have
two kinds of cognitive system for processing number, including
converging data from infants, adults and non-human animals. Although
there is considerable agreement on some form of two-system account,
there is much debate about the form that such an account should take,
and we also summarise these disagreements in order to show the limits of
what might be learned about belief reasoning from the case of number
cognition.

Reasoning about numbers has a protracted developmental course in which
the acquisition of counting with a conventional numerical symbol system
plays a critical role (e.g., Baroody & Dowker, 2003). On the influential
views of Piaget and co-workers (e.g., Piaget & Szeminska, 1952), infants
were entirely incapable of number cognition because they lacked symbolic
mental representations. Older children -- even children who could count
-- seemed often to lack understanding of the conservation of basic
numerical properties of sets over transformations that change perceptual
characteristics. For example, young counters appeared not to understand
that the cardinal value of a set of blocks is unaffected by changing the
spacing between the blocks.  Although subsequent research with improved
methods was able to demonstrate success on Piaget's tasks in
significantly younger children (e.g., [McGarrigle & Donaldson,
197]{#OLE_LINK2}5), prior to the 1980s there was little evidence for
numerical abilities before 2 or 3 years of age when early counting
behaviour appears to show some respect for abstract number properties
(e.g., Gelman & Gallistel, 1978).\
    The view that infants are incapable of number cognition was
profoundly altered by evidence from preferential looking and habituation
paradigms showing precocious sensitivity to number properties. For
example, young infants (5-8 months of age) are sensitive to the number
of items in a repeatedly presented stimulus (Starkey & Cooper, 1980),
they can sum over the number of items in a short sequence (e.g., Wynn,
1996), discriminate between small and large sets of objects (e.g., Xu &
Spelke, 2000), and keep track of the number of items in a small set of
objects following additions or subtractions (e.g., Wynn, 1992). In light
of such evidence the view that infants are entirely insensitive to
number is clearly incorrect (see e.g., Feigenson, Dehane & Spelke, 2004;
Le Corre & Carey, 2008 for recent discussions). 

If this were the end of the story it would be natural to conclude that
experimental methods more sensitive than those used by Piaget and
colleagues have shown that infants do understand number after all. 
However, subsequent research has revealed stark limitations on infants'
abilities.  A proper understanding of number cognition in infants
requires appreciating their limitations as well as infants' surprising
competencies.

Investigations of infants' ability to process precise numerosities
suggest a strict capacity limit of three items (or four items in one
study; Ross-Sheehy, Oakes, & Luck, 2003). To give just one illustration,
infants (aged 14 months) are unlikely to search repeatedly in a box in
which they have seen one item placed, and are more likely to search
twice for two objects and three times for three objects. However, after
seeing four objects placed in a box infants tended to search only once
(Feigenson & Carey, 2003). Another distinctive limitation is observed in
infants' processing of large numbers. Infants (at six months) are able
to discriminate between large numerosities, such as 8 versus 16 dots,
but they can only do so if the ratio of their discrepancy is large
(e.g., 1:2) and perhaps only if the number of items in each collection
sufficiently high (e.g. above 3) (Xu, 2003). Two further sets of results
cast light on these findings from infants. First, a variety of other
species show abilities for precise processing of very small numbers and
approximate processing of large numbers, and these abilities show
limitations analogous to those observed in infants (e.g., Brannon &
Terrace, 1998; Hauser & Carey, 2003). This suggests that infants'
abilities with number are not distinctively human, unlike the more
flexible abilities of older children and adults^5^. Second, there is
evidence that even human adults with formal education in mathematics
retain abilities similar to those of infants. When such adults are
required to make fast judgements, or when their ability to use
strategies such as counting are disrupted experimentally, they remain
able to make precise judgements about small sets and approximate
comparisons of larger sets (e.g., Barth, Kanwisher & Spelke, 2003; Trick
& Pylyshyn, 1994). Adults' precise enumeration of small sets appears to
show just the same limit of 3 or 4 items observed in infants, and, as in
infants, adults' approximate comparison of large sets is limited by the
ratio of the two sets, though this ratio gets smaller with increasing
age, allowing progressively more fine-grained approximations (Halberda &
Feigenson, 2008).

Thus, much evidence points to the existence of numerical judgements in
participants who have limited or no access to language and executive
processes and no training in number, and to the distinction between the
cognitive systems supporting these abilities and the cognitive systems
supporting the additional skills with number and mathematics that many
humans acquire through education. There are, of course, a variety of
characterisations of the early-developing abilities and we describe
these briefly in order to make clear the limits of our analogy with
belief reasoning. Some authors have argued that both precise judgements
for small numbers and approximate judgements for large numbers can be
explained by a single system of analogue number representation that
yields high discriminability (and thus high precision) only for
comparisons of small analogue quantities (corresponding to small
numbers) (e.g., Gallistel & Gelman, 1992, 2000; Gelman & Gallistel,
2004). Others have argued that infants' abilities rely on distinct
mechanisms that process precise and approximate numerosities
independently, each having its own distinct limitations (e.g., Carey,
2004; Le Corre & Carey, 2007; Feigenson, Dehane and Spelke, 2004). In
the latter camp, there is also debate about the nature of the mechanism
that yields precise judgements about small sets, and whether it is the
same mechanism that allows parallel individuation of objects (e.g.,
Trick & Pylyshyn, 1994) or that subserves visual working memory (e.g.,
Vogel, Woodman & Luck, 2001) or that tracks objects via object files
(e.g., Kahneman, Triesman & Gibbs, 1992; see e.g., Feigenson, Dehane and
Spelke, 2004; Le Corre & Carey, 2007).

Finally, there is debate on how the abilities of infants to make limited
judgements about small and large numbers relate to the abilities of
educated children and adults to count and perform arithmetic and other
mathematical operations. Gelman and Gallistel (1978, 2004; Gallistel &
Gelman, 1992, 2000) argue that the analogue number system possessed by
infants affords simple arithmetic operations (such as addition,
subtraction and ordering) and operates over symbolic, analogue number
concepts. On their view, learning to count is a process of mapping such
concepts and operations into natural language. Other authors argue that
infants' number abilities do not involve concepts of numbers or
arithmetic operations related to counting. Thus the principles of
counting must instead be learned, and this learning may be supported by
representations of the analogue number system (e.g., Dehane, 1997; Wynn,
1992), by representations from the system that allows precise
enumeration of small numbers (e.g., Carey, 1994) or by the integration
of both systems (e.g., Feigenson, Dehane & Spelke, 2004). However, on
any of these latter accounts, learning to count requires conceptual
development, not just conceptual mapping.

*The basis for the analogy between number cognition and belief
reasoning.*

Despite debate over the detailed structure of the cognitive systems for
number, there is considerable agreement on points that are critical for
the analogy that we wish to make with belief reasoning. First, the
original view that infants are incapable of number cognition turns out
to be incorrect. In fact, infants have one or more systems that enable
them to make numerical judgements. These systems remain present in
adults and there is evidence of analogous capacities in some non-human
animals. Second, the cognitive efficiency of these systems comes at the
cost of distinctive limitations on the kinds of numerical judgement that
can be made. These limits are relatively specific to the domain of
numerical judgement. They are not explained by facts about the nature of
numbers per se, or by limits on language, general intelligence,
information processing or executive capacity (though the 3-4 item limit
on precise enumeration may be explained by the limits of a specialised
system for visual working memory). Third, these "signature limits"
provide key evidence for the existence of distinct systems for
processing number (and closely-related functions) and for the similarity
of these systems in human infants, human adults and non-human animals.
Fourth, it would be quite wrong to conclude that infants or non-humans
understand number in the same sense as educated older children or
adults. The signature limits of the basic number system(s) are only
overcome if and when older children acquire a conventional number
system. This is a protracted process that takes several years, and the
resulting numerical abilities depend rather heavily on general cognitive
resources for language, information processing and executive control.
Whether or not basic number concepts exist before (see e.g., Gallistel &
Gelman, 1992, 2000), the acquisition of a conventional number system is
widely agreed to transform the representational powers of children's
numerical abilities, adding new concepts and enabling new operations
(e.g., Carey, 2004; Feigenson, Dehane & Spelke, 2004; Gelman &
Gallistel, 2004).

In sum, the case of number cognition provides a model for a two-system
account that combines cognitive efficiency (achieved by one or more
sub-systems) with flexibility (achieved by cognitively demanding
reasoning processes), and shows how it is possible to tell which system
is being used on a given task by examining whether or not performance is
subject to "signature limits". We propose that something similar is true
of belief reasoning, and that the above points provide a powerful
analogy for interpreting the existing evidence on belief reasoning and
for making novel predictions.

*Systems and concepts. *As noted above, it is a moot point whether
infants or non-humans represent numbers as such. We do not think this is
critical for making a useful analogy with belief reasoning. In the
literature on number cognition we take the primary discovery to be that
infants, human adults and non-human animals have analogous abilities
that enable them to solve number tasks with little or no recourse to
general cognitive processes such as language and executive control. It
is a further question whether exercising these abilities involves
representing numbers. Similarly, our proposal about theory of mind has
two parts that we will treat separately in subsequent sections. The
first part concerns the existence of two types of system for belief
reasoning -- one that is cognitively efficient but limited and
inflexible and another that is flexible but demanding of general
cognitive resources. Here, we follow the literature on number cognition
by seeking converging evidence across infants, older children, non-human
primates and human adults. In this section we make no claims about
whether beliefs are represented as such; by "belief reasoning" we mean
exercising an ability to deal with tasks where belief matters. The
second part concerns how a process of belief reasoning could be
efficient, and in particular whether efficient belief reasoning involves
representations of beliefs, of behaviours or of something else. As
indicated in our title, we shall argue that it involves representing
states which are like beliefs in guiding action but unlike beliefs in
not having propositional content and several further respects. In this
later section we follow the literature on number cognition by examining
what can be learned from the "signature limits" that arise in
cognitively efficient processing.

### What would show that there are two systems for processing beliefs?

### Prima facie case.

### A primary feature of human adults' belief reasoning competence is the ability to use all cognitively available facts to ascribe any belief that the subject can themselves entertain. From this perspective, belief reasoning is an archetypal "central process" , is as flexible as any other type of reasoning, and in consequence, we should expect it to be demanding of general processing resources (e.g., Evans, 2003). In short, belief reasoning must be highly flexible, but we should expect this to come at the cost of cognitive efficiency.

### However, belief reasoning is also supposed to play a role in guiding fast-moving activities, such as competitive and strategic interaction and communication (Grice, 1989; Sperber & Wilson, 1986/95). How can belief reasoning be both flexible and efficient? This tension is not unique to the problem of belief reasoning. The same problems occur in literatures as diverse as general reasoning and decision-making (e.g., Evans, 2003), social cognition and person-perception (e.g., Gilbert, 1998) and, as we have just discussed, number cognition (e.g., Feigenson, Dehane & Spelke, 2004). Although the details differ, these diverse literatures all propose two types of system: one that is efficient and inflexible and one that is flexible but cognitively demanding. It seems at least reasonable to propose that the same may be true for beliefs.

###  *Theory of mind in infants and children.*

* *A large literature has examined the development of an adult-like
ability to reason about beliefs flexibly and efficiently. These
abilities appear to develop gradually over several years^6^, they are
closely tied to developments in language and executive function , may be
facilitated by explicit training and environmental influences, such as
siblings and altered by cultural background to some degree (e.g.,
Lillard, 1998). These are exactly the characteristics that would be
expected for the development of reasoning processes that are flexible
but demanding of cognitive resources.

It is against this background that recent evidence of precocious
abilities in infants appears so remarkable. Put simply, if a large
evidence base suggests that it takes several years, and significant
developments in language and executive function, for children to acquire
adult-like belief reasoning abilities, how are we to interpret signs of
belief reasoning in infants as young as 13 months (Surian et al., 2007),
who are notably lacking in language and executive abilities? One
possibility is that dependence on language and executive function is an
artefact of experimental designs and not an intrinsic feature of any
theory of mind abilities; tests of infant theory of mind succeed by
stripping away the extraneous dependence on language and executive
function that usually obscure this competence until early childhood
(e.g., Leslie, 2005; Surian et al., 2007). If this is the case then
infants' belief reasoning abilities will be limited only by
experimenters' ingenuity in devising experiments to reveal infants'
abilities and by the concepts they can apply (if infants fail to ascribe
beliefs about global warming, quarks or nativism that can only be
because they cannot apply such concepts). However, the case of number
cognition suggests another possibility: that later-developing theory of
mind abilities involve flexible cognitive processes which, by their very
nature, depend on language or executive function; infants' precocious
abilities are underwritten by a distinct set of cognitively efficient
processes that do not depend upon language and executive function.
Importantly, if this is the case, then such cognitive efficiency is
likely to come at the expense of limited flexibility.

The way to determine whether infants' belief reasoning involves
cognitive processes distinct from those that support adults' flexible
belief reasoning is to look for apparently arbitrary "signature limits"
analogous to the 3-item and ratio limits on infant number cognition. But
what would count as an arbitrary limit on the flexibility of belief
reasoning? To answer this question we need to consider the nature of
belief. In standard accounts, a belief is an attitude to a content that
plays a certain psychological role.  Typically, in explicit adult theory
of mind reasoning the content is propositional (that is, sentence-like)
and the psychological role includes being caused and justified by
perceptions, interacting with other beliefs and desires, and causing and
justifying actions. Infants' theory of mind abilities may be limited
with respect to content or psychological role or both.

In terms of content,* *all experiments involving infants mentioned so
far require only that infants can track attitudes to objects' locations.
Other experiments may require that infants and young children understand
attitudes to objects that bear certain distinguishing features
(including shape or colour). No study has yet suggested that infants
track beliefs involving both the features and the location of an object
(e.g., The red ball is in the cupboard), or that they track beliefs
whose contents can only be represented using quantifiers (e.g. There is
no red ball in the cupboard), or that in tracking beliefs they are
sensitive to modes of presentation as would be necessary for level-2
perspective-taking. If infants' belief reasoning were shown to be
limited in these or similar ways we could conclude that whatever they
represent, it is not a state with propositional content.

Infants' belief reasoning may also be limited with respect to
psychological role*.* Infants and young children do show some correct
expectations about the causes of belief states. For example, they do not
expect a person to acquire beliefs when obviously disengaged (for
example, when she is facing a wall); they do not expect people to
acquire beliefs about an object merely in virtue of standing on it and
they do not take close proximity to an object to be a necessary
condition for having a belief about it; instead some kind of purposive
interaction with the object appears to be required . Nonetheless,
children may struggle with level-1 perspective taking before 24 months
(Moll and Tomasello, 2006; though see Luo & Baillargeon, 2007; Sodian,
Thoermer & Metz, 2007), and not much is yet known about infants'
understanding of inference or testimony as causes of belief (see e.g.,
Song, Onishi, Baillargeon & Fisher, 2008). One potential limitation in
psychological role concerns interactions among beliefs and with other
states. Infants may not understand that what you already believe
modulates causes of beliefs but instead think of beliefs as independent
of each other in much the way that perceptions are. And instead of
understanding how beliefs interact with desires in influencing the means
we select to achieve a goal, they may think of beliefs as fixing
parameters on basic object-directed actions (for example, where someone
will reach or walk to). If infants' belief reasoning were shown to be
limited in some such ways, we could conclude that whatever they
represent does not involve the causal and justificatory structure that
is constitutive of adults' flexible belief reasoning .

In sum, although there is evidence that infants have some abilities to
solve tasks involving beliefs, the evidence falls well short of
establishing several criteria for saying that infants ascribe beliefs as
such. We should emphasise that our aim is not to down-play the
impressive findings from existing studies of infants' belief reasoning;
indeed, we think it likely that current evidence underestimates the
sophistication of infants' abilities. Rather, our point is to question
whether it is plausible that infants' abilities are limited *only* by
their general knowledge and the concepts they can apply. Our contention
is that infants' belief reasoning abilities may in fact be subject to
arbitrary limits analogous to the capacity limit of 3 items or the ratio
limit to which their numerical capacities are subject. These limits on
belief reasoning are likely to be manifest both in terms of the type of
content that infants can ascribe, and the psychological roles to which
they are sensitive. Such limits provide vital clues to the nature of the
cognitive processes supporting belief reasoning in infancy (see below).
Further studies of infants will, of course, provide informative data on
these questions. But as in the case of number, another test for a good
account of infants' abilities will be the degree to which it fits with
findings from non-human animals and human adults, and it is to these
findings that we turn next.

### Theory of mind in non-human animals

Evidence from non-human animals is of relevance in the current context
because, like human infants, non-human animals are distinctly lacking in
the linguistic, symbolic, or executive capacities that appear to be
necessary for humans to develop the ability to reason flexibly about
numbers and beliefs. There is evidence that several non-human species
enjoy capacities for precise enumeration and numerical estimation
analogous to those observed in human infants, but lack the flexible
number reasoning abilities of educated humans (e.g., Feigenson et al.,
2003). This is an important piece of converging evidence for the
existence of parallel systems for number cognition in humans. Is there
similar evidence concerning theory of mind abilities?

The most extensive investigation of belief reasoning in non-human
animals has been conducted in chimpanzees (e.g., Tomasello, Call & Hare,
2003). Despite much controversy about how to characterise chimpanzee
social reasoning, there is broad consensus on two boundaries that are
relevant in the current discussion. First, their belief reasoning
abilities appear limited in some of the ways that infants' and younger
children's are, for they systematically fail direct tests of false
belief understanding (e.g., Povinelli & Vonk, 2003; Tomasello, Call &
Hare, 2003) and there is no evidence that chimpanzees succeed on tasks
that require level-2 perspective taking (Call & Tomasello, 2005).
Second, chimpanzees do have some theory of mind abilities. They are
sensitive to the direction in which other chimpanzees and humans are
looking and follow gaze behind to objects out of view and taking into
account opaque barriers much as 18-month-olds do . They can adapt their
strategy for retrieving food depending upon what a dominant competitor
can see, or has seen (Hare, Call, Agnetta & Tomasello, 2000; Hare, Call
& Tomasello, 2001), and can actively manipulate whether or not a
competitor can see them in order to gain strategic advantage (Hare, Call
& Tomasello, 2006). Whether or not they represent perceptions or
beliefs, they are certainly acting in ways which are beneficial in
virtue of controlling what others see and believe.

Recent investigation of scrub-jays' caching behaviours provides further
converging evidence. When choosing a location to cache food in the
presence of a competitor they prefer far to near, darker to lighter, and
occluded to in-view locations ; they will also re-cache items frequently
in the presence of a competitor but not when alone . These behaviours
are not found when caching non-food items or when caching in the
presence of a partner . This shows that scrub-jays, like chimpanzees,
act in ways which are beneficial because they deny others perceptual
experience. More impressively, when recovering food in private
scrub-jays prefer to recover caches that were observed by a competitor
compared to those cached in private, and when recovering food in the
presence of a competitor they prefer to recover food cached in the
presence of that competitor to food cached in the presence of another
(now absent) competitor . We regard these behaviours as manifestations
of belief reasoning because they are beneficial to the agent in virtue
of facts about the beliefs of competitors. While we do not know of any
evidence on the limits of scrub jay's belief reasoning, there are no
findings to date that are incompatible with the prediction that scrub
jays' abilities will be limited in ways analogous to those of
chimpanzees and infants.

A key focus for controversy is whether chimpanzees or scrub jays track
gaze only in behavioural terms (e.g., Dally, Emery & Clayton, 2006; Penn
& Povinelli, 2007, 2008; Povinelli & Vonk, 2003) or whether they form
some representation of what is seen when someone looks (e.g., Call &
Tomasello, 2005; Emery & Clayton, 2001, 2007). In this section (but not
the next) we duck this issue in order to focus on what everyone agrees
about: somehow or other these non-human animals reliably act in ways
that are beneficial in part because of facts about beliefs. Thus, there
is some convergence between the evidence from non-human animals and from
infants. In both instances there is some evidence for belief reasoning
despite very limited resources for language and executive function. And
there is evidence that these abilities are limited, and limited in
similar ways.

### Theory of mind in adults

Educated adults' everyday number cognition typically includes the
ability to count and to perform arithmetic operations over a wide range
of numbers. These abilities require the acquisition of a conventional
symbolic counting system; they also depend upon limited cognitive
resources for working memory and executive control. Importantly, adults
also retain the mechanisms used by infants and some non-human animals
for precise enumeration and numerical estimation, enabling rapid and
relatively effortless judgements and intuitions about number. Is there
evidence in adults of analogous parallel systems for beliefs?

We take it as established that adults do indeed engage in highly
flexible reasoning about beliefs. Thus, our first question is whether
such reasoning is indeed cognitively demanding. Direct investigation of
this question found evidence that belief reasoning was not automatic and
suggested an important role for strategic control in theory of mind
tasks (Apperly, Simpson, Riggs et al., 2006; see also Saxe, Schultz &
Jiang, 2006). This conclusion is supported by evidence that variation in
adults' performance on different belief reasoning problems is related to
their performance on tests of general processing speed and executive
function (e.g., German & Hehman, 2006). Consistent with this, belief
reasoning may also be disrupted if adults simultaneously perform a task
that interferes with working memory (Mckinnon & Moskovitch 2006; see
also Bull, Phillips & Conway, 2008) or language processing (which may
also require working memory) , or if working memory or other aspects of
executive function are impaired as a result of brain injury (for a
review, see Apperly, Samson & Humphreys, 2005). The cognitive demands on
belief reasoning are reflected in everyday practice; for example, adults
show a tendency for egocentric bias when interpreting the meaning of
speakers (e.g., Keysar, Lin and Barr, 2003) and predicting the beliefs
of others (e.g., Birch & Bloom, 2007; Mitchell Robinson, Isaacs & Nye,
1996); and overcoming this bias is cognitively demanding (e.g., Epley,
Keysar, Van Boven & Gilovich, 2004). In these respects belief reasoning
in adults resembles the number reasoning abilities that are acquired
relatively late and relatively slowly through the learning of a
conventional symbol system. In both cases, these abilities are highly
flexible but depend on limited cognitive resources for memory and
strategic control.

In contrast, only very recently has there been any direct evidence of
cognitively efficient belief reasoning in adults. These studies are not
yet published, but are mentioned here to highlight the future
contribution that such studies might make. Samson, Apperly, Braithwaite
& Andrews (under submission) presented adult participants with a level-1
visual perspective-taking task in which they made rapid judgements about
the visual perspective of themselves or a computer-generated avatar.
Sometimes the participant could see the same number of objects as the
avatar, and sometimes they could see more. Consistent with other
evidence of an egocentric bias in perspective-taking (e.g., Bernstein,
Atance, Loftus & Meltzoff, 2004; Birch & Bloom, 2004, 2007) participants
were slower at judging the how many objects the avatar could see when
they could see more objects themselves. More surprisingly, the reverse
was also true: when participants judged how many objects they could see,
they were slower when the avatar saw fewer objects than when the avatar
saw the same number. Critically, this interference from the avatar's
perspective was not eliminated in a second experiment in which
participants judged only their own perspective for an entire block of 52
trials. This suggests that, even when there was no reason to work out
what the avatar could see and when doing so increased participants'
difficulty judging their own perspective, the avatar's perspective was
computed nonetheless. This clearly raises the possibility that the
avatar's perspective was being computed using cognitive processes that
were fast and efficient (fast and efficient enough to produce a
representation of what the avatar could see in time for this to
interfere with participant's judgments about what they themselves could
see), and also resistant to strategic control (in the second experiment
participants did not exploit the fact that processing the avatar's
perspective was irrelevant in order to avoid the costs associated with
processing this information). These findings only concerned judgements
about the current visual experience of "self" and "other", but
preliminary evidence from two other studies (Kovacs & Mehler, 2007;
Wang, Apperly, Samson & Braithwaite, Under submission) suggests that
similar interference may occur even between recent (but not current)
visual experience, that is to say, "belief-like" states (see below).
These studies of fast, efficient and potentially automatic theory of
mind processes in adults are clearly in their early stages, but on the
current analysis these abilities, and in particular, the degree to which
they are limited to certain kinds of belief, are likely to be an
interesting avenue for future work. For example, an obvious prediction
for a "signature limit" arising from evidence that neither infants nor
chimpanzees appear capable of level-2 perspective taking (where they
must appreciate not only that someone sees something, but how they see
it) is that adults might not automatically compute the avatar's
perspective if the task involved level-2 perspective taking.

Importantly though, in addition to these preliminary findings, there are
compelling reasons for thinking that adults *need* fast and efficient
belief reasoning. This indirect evidence comes from consideration of the
cognitive requirements of communication. It has long been noted that
adults' sophisticated moment-by-moment social interaction and their
verbal and non-verbal communication seems to depend upon keeping track
of what other people know and think . The speed and apparent lack of
effort in everyday communication suggests that the necessary theory of
mind computations must likewise be made quickly and efficiently (e.g.,
Sperber & Wilson 2002). This need is clearly at odds with the findings
from studies that have actually examined adults' reasoning about beliefs
and knowledge (see above).  Most notably, Keysar, Linn & Bar (2003)
showed that adults' interpretations of simple instructions tended to be
insensitive to differences in both perspective and belief, although
these differences were manifest. If adults struggle to use simple theory
of mind inferences to guide communication in such uncomplicated cases,
it seems unlikely that similar inferences are the principal guide for
on-line interpretation in everyday communication. To the extent that
theory of mind abilities are needed for everyday communication, adults
need a fast and efficient system for theory of mind. On the current
analysis we expect such efficiency to come at the price of flexibility,
which will be manifest in signature limits on the ways in which everyday
communication can be guided.

*Summary*

We have reviewed a variety of evidence suggesting that the belief
reasoning abilities of infants and non-human animals *could* be limited.
Currently, there is positive evidence only for a relatively small set of
abilities in these groups, and intriguingly, there is also evidence of
some similar limitations across groups (e.g., it may be that neither
infants nor chimpanzees are capable of level-2 perspective taking).
Importantly, we also argued that there were good reasons for thinking
that the abilities of infants and non-human animals *should *be limited.
As is the case in other domains such as number, person perception and
general reasoning, the flexibility of older children's and adults'
capacity to reason about beliefs is likely to come at the cost of
placing heavy demands upon language and executive function. Human
infants and non-human animals lack the linguistic and executive
capacities of older children and adults, leading to the suggestion that
their belief reasoning is achieved by different cognitive processes that
trade flexibility for cognitive efficiency. Finally, an adequate
explanation of adults' belief reasoning abilities seems to require that
they have both cognitively efficient processes that are likely to be
inflexible and highly flexible processes that are clearly cognitively
demanding. On analogy with the case of number we propose that the
cognitively efficient capacity of adults is at least partially
underwritten by processes identical or similar to those found in infants
and perhaps non-human animals. As in the case of number, evidence
bearing on this issue will come from careful examination of the
"signature limits" on these cognitively efficient processes, and it is
to this that we turn in the following section.

Different paths to efficiency give rise to distinct signature
limitations

Supposing that the conflicting needs for efficiency and flexibility are
reconciled by the existence of two systems for belief reasoning, what
could be the nature of the more efficient system and what empirical
findings would help decide between theoretically possible alternatives?
Although something like a two-system account for belief reasoning has
been proposed by several authors (e.g., Call & Tomasello, 2008; Doherty,
2006; Gomez, 2007; O'Neil, 1996; Penn, Holyoak & Povinelli, 2008;
Perner, 1991; these critical questions have not been adequately
addressed. To answer these questions we first identify factors that make
belief reasoning costly and then consider several ways belief reasoning
could be achieved without these factors.

Why is belief reasoning costly? At least part of the cost arises from
the type of reason-giving explanation in which beliefs feature. For
example:

She reached for the salt container because she saw the white grains,
and---believing them to be sugar---intended to sweeten her pie.

Reason-giving explanations like this one have several features . First,
they involve complex causal structures: the perceptions influence
beliefs which, together with desires, lead to intentions which guide
action. Note how reason-giving explanations invoke, explicitly or
implicitly, multiple interacting causes some of which may be far removed
in time and space from the salient causes of an action. Second, they are
abductive: arriving at them involves inference to the best explanation,
where there are no restrictions in principle on what might be relevant
to the best explanation. Third, they have a normative dimension: except
in special circumstances, a true explanation reveals how an agent's
actions are reasonable in the light of her beliefs and desires. Fourth,
they involve ascriptions of states with propositional contents: it is
possible to have beliefs involving quantification, modality and the rest
(for example it is possible to believe that Noah wasn't the only person
who could have survived the flood). These features are all liable to be
costly. If anything demands working memory, inhibition and strategic
control it is surely abductive reasoning about complex causal structures
of states individuated by propositional contents and their normative
implications.

How could belief reasoning be more efficient? At a minimum, it must not
involve explanations with the four features identified above (which
means that it cannot be reasoning about beliefs as such ). Several
possibilities are consistent with this requirement and more than one may
turn out to be actual. In the rest of this section we evaluate different
possible paths to efficiency. We begin with two cases that we do not
think are viable explanations for efficient belief reasoning. We then
discuss some proposals that may be viable and consider how it might be
possible to distinguish between them by considering the nature of the
processing limitations -- "signature limits" -- that they would entail.

*Accounts that do not explain efficient belief reasoning.*

*Innate belief reasoning competence. *A number of authors have suggested
that theory of mind in humans depends upon an innate capacity for
parsing mental states from behaviour, which is often characterised as a
mental "module" that may consist of two or more sub-systems (e.g.,.
These claims are primarily driven by concerns about the problem of
acquisition. By obviating the need for learning these theories aim to
explain how it might be possible for infants to have abstract
psychological concepts early in life, possibly before they have the
general cognitive resources to learn such concepts, or the experiences
necessary for such learning. According to such accounts infants might
not be able to use the full range of abilities that their theory of mind
competence affords because of limitations in the conceptual content
available to infant cognition, and limitations in their capacity for
general processing (e.g., Fodor, 1992) or executive function (e.g.,
Leslie, 2005). But the complexity of infants' abilities will increase as
they acquire more diverse conceptual content and new capacities for
memory and executive function, culminating in the highly flexible
abilities of adults.

Although such theories offer a solution to the problem of acquisition,
they do not easily explain how belief reasoning could be simultaneously
cognitively efficient and cognitively flexible in adults. This is
because the features that explain the superior abilities of adults --
greater knowledge, greater memory and executive control -- are the very
features that also make adults inefficient at belief reasoning, and on
this account these features are added to the same "one-system" that is
present in infants. Innateness, then, does not, in and of itself,
explain efficiency. This is not an argument against innateness; our
point is simply that these theories as currently formulated do not
directly address questions about efficiency. More generally, we believe
that merely describing the capacity to reason about beliefs as "modular"
is inadequate to explain how efficient belief reasoning is possible
because this does not meet the key requirement identified above: to show
how belief reasoning is possible without abduction over complex causal
and normative structures of states individuated by propositions. To
stipulate that one form of belief reasoning is innate, tacit or
implicit, automatic or modular is not to solve the problem of efficiency
but to presuppose that it can be solved.

*Reasoning about factual rather than mental states.* Perner (1991) and
Csibra and Gergely argue that before children can represent beliefs,
they can predict actions by reasoning about facts. To illustrate,
consider "James ran towards the bus because it was about to depart."
This sentence appears to explain James' behaviour by appeal to a fact
rather than a belief and an implicit desire. While the sentence can be
used as shorthand for a belief-desire explanation, it could also be
taken literally as explaining James' running in terms of the facts .
Providing beliefs and desires are largely shared, such explanations will
yield the same predictions as belief-desire reasoning does in a useful
range of cases. Moreover, Perner suggests that older children and adults
may often reason about agents' relations to factual situations rather
than beliefs (Perner, 1991, p. 211).

This proposal may be correct, in that infants (and others) may indeed
sometimes reason about agents' relations to factual situations as a
proxy for belief-reasoning. However, it is unable to deal with
interpersonal differences in perception or belief and so is inadequate
for explaining the full range of infant and non-human theory of mind
reasoning. More importantly, merely shifting from mental states to
factual states does not remove the obstacles to cognitive efficiency
identified above: whether about facts or beliefs, the reasoning in
question still appears to require abduction over multiple states
individuated by propositions and subject to the same normative
constraints . (Of course identifying facts may be less costly than
identifying beliefs ; our point is that identifying facts *as
potentially explanatory of action *fails to remove some of the
cognitively costly problems involved in reasoning about beliefs as
such.) Furthermore, switching from mental to factual states does not
appear to be necessary for gaining cognitive efficiency. For several
highly efficient cognitive processes operative in infancy involve
computations over unobservables; these unobservables arguably include
intended phonic gestures in speech perception and causal relations .
Thus, although we think it is plausible that children, adults and
non-human animals sometimes reason about agents' relationships to facts
rather than beliefs, and although we recognise that reasoning about
facts may be a developmental stepping-stone towards reasoning about
beliefs (e.g., Perner, 1991), we do not think this alone is a plausible
way of achieving cognitive efficiency.

*Accounts that might explain efficient belief reasoning.*

*Automatization.* Suddendorf and Whiten (2003) expand on Povinelli and
Giambrone's (1999) claim that humans may achieve cognitive efficiency in
some theory of mind operations, including belief reasoning, via
automatization. That is to say, belief reasoning may originally be a
hard-won development that is demanding of cognitive resources, but
becomes efficient in adults through repeated practice. Once again, there
is an intriguing analogy with the case of number cognition. Symbolic
addition (e.g., computing the sum "10" when presented with the symbol
string "4+6") is a hard-won development that requires explicit
instruction. However, once learned, this may become automatized with
practice, leading educated adults to compute 10 when presented with
"4+6", even when this actually interferes with the task they are trying
to perform (e.g., LeFevre, Bisanz & Markonjic, 1988). If this analogy is
mapped directly for the case of belief reasoning, then we should expect
that in highly practiced situations (for example, a poker expert playing
poker) automatized processes may infer an agent's beliefs without
placing substantial demands on general cognitive processes. An
intriguing alternative that we think equally possible is that actions
that originally required a belief inference (such as working out when to
feint and counter-feint in fencing) may, with practice, be automatized
into direct mappings between observations of the opponent's behaviour
and plans for one's own behaviour, with belief inferences no longer
required^7^.

We agree with these authors that it is highly plausible that adults and
older children achieve some cognitively efficient belief reasoning
through automatization. However, as these authors note, automatization
can only lead to efficient belief reasoning in an organism that has
first achieved the capacity to reason about beliefs in a non-automatic
way that makes significant demands on cognitive resources. Moreover,
automatization will necessarily be restricted to well-practiced cases.
Thus, automatization cannot explain efficient belief reasoning in novel
cases, and it cannot explain the efficient belief reasoning abilities of
infants and non-human animals (unless we suppose that infants and
non-human animals already have non-automatic belief reasoning despite
being deficient in language and executive control).

*Behaviour associations and behaviour rules. *A number of authors have
suggested that theory of mind abilities in infants and non-human animals
are supported by learned associations or (possibly innate) rules that
map between observed behaviours . On this view, infants and non-human
animals exploit statistical regularities in sequences of behaviours such
as: head orienting to an object is frequently followed by approaching an
object. Where adults may ultimately re-interpret such patterns in folk
psychological terms and so use belief reasoning to predict behaviours
(e.g., Penn & Povinelli, 2007), it is claimed the same predictions can
be achieved by identifying regularities in behaviours alone. On one
view, these regularities are identified in something like the way that
infants can distinguish non-word from word-like sequences of syllables
by discerning transitional probabilities . On another view, these
regularities are captured by innate behavioural rules.

The ability to form expectations about a future behaviour based on a
behaviour that has just been observed may offer a cognitively efficient
method for co-ordinating one's own behaviour with others', but it is an
open question whether they explain the full range of phenomena observed
in infants, adults and non-human animals. The bold assumptions made by
the above authors are doubly conjectural, for it has yet to be
investigated both whether appropriate regularities in behaviour exist
and whether subjects can identify such regularities. These questions
cannot be decided a priori any more than questions about the existence
of phonological structures in language and our sensitivity to them.
Research on reading statistical patterns in behaviours is only just
beginning .

Relevant to the possibility that infants and perhaps non-human animals
learn associations between behaviours, we so far know that adults can
learn to identify regularities in the linear ordering of activities
which enable them to distinguish expected from unexpected sequences even
in novel cases , and that infants can segment linear sequences of
activity into units that match achieving a goal such a putting a lid on
a jar or folding a scarf . It seems plausible, then, that parsing
regularities in behaviour plays a key role in theory of mind abilities,
a role analogous to parsing phonological structure in linguistic
communication. However, if the case of language is any guide,
sensitivity to behavioural regularities is essential but falls as far
short of generating an approximation to belief reasoning as infant
babbling falls short of meaningful conversation.

As Baldwin and colleagues' research exemplifies, belief reasoning based
on behaviour associations can be discerned by signature limits. Unless
behaviour associations are innate, such reasoning will depend on
individual learning histories and should be limited to commonly observed
behaviours (such as head turning and approach) and not conceptually
similar behaviours that are less commonly observed (such as head turning
and moving away). Equally, behaviour associations should not be limited
to regularities in behaviour that are intelligible in the light of
mental states: behavioural regularities that are unintelligible in terms
of mental states should be equally easy to learn and to process .

The hypothesis that infants or non-human animals learn behaviour
associations for themselves should be distinguished from the possibility
that they are innately endowed with cognitive rules that allow one
behaviour to predicted from observation of another (e.g., Perner, in
press). This possibility clearly protects the individual from the
vagaries of their own particular learning environment, thus eliminating
one signature limit of associationist accounts. Critically, however,
there is at least one further signature limit of behavioural accounts
that holds whether we suppose that the individual has behavioural
associations or behavioural rules. According to Penn and Povinelli
(2007), "The theory of mind debate among comparative researchers \[and
for current purposes this means any behavioural rule or behavioural
association account\] should turn only around the question of whether,
in addition to the representational abilities that any cognitive agent
possesses....., some particular cognitive system in the agent in
question also produces information that is specific to the cognitive
perspective of another agent and uses this information to predict the
behaviour of the agent" pp 733-4. In other words, although behavioural
rules or associations link one behaviour of an agent with another, they
do not lead to the generation of any content for "what is in the head"
of the agent. Thus, any phenomenon that demonstrates interference or
confusion between the subject's own perspective and the content of the
target agent's perspective would fall outside of what could be explained
by behavioural rules or associations. As an example, we note that
preliminary evidence of just this kind was reported in our earlier
section on theory of mind in adults, where three studies (Kovacs &
Mehler, 2007; Samson et al., under submission; Wang et al., under
submission) show evidence of interference between self-perspective and
automatically generated content corresponding to the perspective of
another. Clearly, this in no way undermines the possibility that
infants, adults and non-human animals do indeed have behavioural rules
or associations as an efficient way of solving some theory of mind
problems. But it does indicate that behavioural rules or associations
may well be insufficient to explain all instances of efficient theory of
mind in current and future studies, and it suggests the kind of evidence
that may be critical for deciding between these accounts in future work.

*Specialised processing of belief-like states. *If automatization and
behaviour rules or associations alone turn out to be insufficient to
explain efficient belief reasoning, what else is there? Several authors
have independently attempted to characterise a mode of explanation
intermediate between mindless behaviourism and full-blown propositional
attitude psychology. For example, Gomez (2007) has suggested we focus on
primitive intentional relations to objects established by gaze, O'Neil
(1996) and Doherty (2006) have discussed a notion of engagement* *with
objects, uses the notion of an "intervening variable" to explain
primitive theory of mind notions and Call (2001) credits chimpanzees
with a "representational" rather than a "metarepresentational"
understanding of seeing. Constructing such an intermediate scheme of
explanation is a major challenge . Here we attempt to sketch enough of
the scheme to illustrate its plausibility and generate predictions
capable of distinguishing it from alternative hypotheses such as
behaviour reading and reasoning about propositional attitudes as such.

Start with the notion of a field as a certain region of space centred on
an individual and define *encountering *as a relation between the
individual, an object and a location such that the relation obtains when
the object is in the individual's field. This definition can be refined.
The key requirement is that conditions under which an encounter occurs
must be specified without appeal to anything psychological. While
meeting this requirement it is possible to make the conditions under
which an object is encountered approximate those under which an object
is perceived. For example, we can allow that occluded objects are not
encountered unless they are either noisy or moving on a natural
trajectory that is not entirely occluded. Given sufficient
sophistication, encountering can serve as a proxy for perceiving in a
useful range of cases. An agent may purposively attempt to manipulate
others' encounters: for example, it may be beneficial to prevent others
from encountering one's food.

The next step is to introduce registration, which is a relation much
like encountering except that it continues to obtain even after an
object is no longer in one's field. One stands in the registering
relation to an object and location if one encountered it at that
location and if one has not since encountered it somewhere else.
Registrations resemble beliefs in having correctness conditions that may
not obtain, since an object may happen not to be where an individual
registers it as being. Their interest lies in their connections to
action. One can understand registration as an enabling condition for
action, so that registering an object and location enables one to act on
it later providing its location does not move. This understanding of
registration would be useful to an organism, for example, because it
would motivate the organism to move objects a competitor encountered in
the past. Further, registration also can be understood as determining
which location an individual will direct their actions to when
attempting to act on that object. This more sophisticated understanding
(which requires the notion of an unsuccessful action), enables one to
predict actions based on incorrect registrations and so approximate
belief reasoning to such a great extent as to pass some false belief
tasks ^9^.

Registrations, then, serve as proxies for beliefs both true and false:
in a limited but useful range of situations, what someone believes about
objects will match what they register. Registration could be made more
sophisticated, for example by allowing properties other than location to
be encountered and registered. In order to meet the requirements for
cognitive efficiency identified at the start of this section, two
restrictions must be observed: registrations must be relations to
objects and properties, not to propositions; and registrations must have
their effects on action by setting parameters for action independently
of each other and independently of any psychological states, or, if they
do interact, they must do so in ways that are codifiable (unlike
beliefs, whose interactions with desires, intentions and other beliefs
are as complex as interactions among reasons). These restrictions are
consistent with allowing that reasoning about registrations would enable
someone to track beliefs, true and false, in a limited range of
situations. At the same time, reasoning about registrations imposes
signature limits. It does not permit tracking beliefs that involve
quantifiers (no absences, then) or indefinitely complex combinations of
properties (perhaps large melons and yellow melons but probably not
large yellow melons). Nor does reasoning about registrations allow for a
distinction between what is represented and how it is represented
(sometimes referred to as mode of presentation or sense), although
registrations could in principle allow for a weaker type of perspective
by including reference to the agent's location. Accordingly,
registrations would support level-1 perspective-taking (e.g.,
appreciating that an agent does not see an object that you see) but not
level-2 perspective-taking (e.g., appreciating whether an agent sees an
object from the back or from the side). These and other limitations
distinguish registrations from beliefs. We describe registrations as
belief-like states because they resemble beliefs insofar as they
function to keep an individual's actions in step with relevant
information even after such information is no longer immediately
accessible.

How could we tell whether, in practice, efficient belief reasoning
involves belief-like states such as registrations? By identifying
signature limits and seeking converging evidence from different methods
and different subject groups. In the case of number, infants' ability to
handle precise numerosities appears limited to the representation of 3
or 4 items. Moreover this limit is arbitrary. Nothing about the nature
of numbers predicts this limitation. Nor is the limit due to the
learning environment to which infants are exposed or to limited
development in capacities for general working memory or executive
control that support more flexible behaviour and develop throughout
childhood. The 3-4 item limit is just a fact about the cognitive system
that infants use for processing precise numerosity, whether that
cognitive system is domain-specific for number (e.g., Gallistel &
Gelman, 1992, 2000) or whether it is a limited-capacity system for
object-based attention (e.g., Trick & Pylyshyn, 1994) or visual working
memory (e.g., Vogel, Woodman & Luck, 2001) that affords numerical
judgements. Similarly, reasoning about registration, if it occurs, would
be limited in ways that are arbitrary with respect to the nature of
belief and inexplicable by appeal to variations in individual's learning
history or the capacity of general processing resources. We would expect
the capacity observed in infants also be observed in human adults with
the same signature limitations; and we would expect similarly limited
abilities (though not necessarily identical) to be observed in at least
some non-human animals. Converging evidence from these three sources
would provide strong evidence in favour of specialised systems for
reasoning about belief-like states.

*Summary*. To achieve processing efficiency we need a way of tracking
beliefs that does not involve the costly features of reason-giving
explanations. This can be achieved in at least three ways: by
automatization, behavioural associations and processing belief-like
states. These are not mutually incompatible and more than one may turn
out to be used. Each achieves efficiency at the expense of different
signature limitations on the nature and complexity of theory of mind
processing that can be achieved. Our key point for empirical
investigations is therefore that identifying limitations that cannot be
explained in terms of a lack of general processing resources or
conceptual content indicates that a cognitively efficient process is
being employed; and the nature of any limitations can indicate the means
by which efficiency is being achieved.

How could the two systems be related?

One question not addressed so far is how the two theory of mind systems
might be related either in development or in the mature state of adults.
In the case of number, understanding the relation between infants\' and
later-developing abilities is still a major challenge , but there is
some helpful evidence on the relationship between the number systems of
older children and adults. Adults' symbolic and non-symbolic number
systems are sufficiently separate that evidence of double dissociations
may be found following brain injury (e.g., Lemer, Dehane, Spelke &
Cohen, 2003). However, there is also evidence that these systems are not
entirely isolated from each another. Gilmore et al. (2007) found that 5
and 6-year-old children^10^ show similar abilities to perform
approximate numerical judgements for numbers that differed in a
sufficiently high ratio, whether the numbers were presented
non-symbolically (e.g., as dot-patterns) or symbolically (as numerals).
The authors suggest that children achieved this by mapping symbolic
representations of number onto their approximate representations of
numerical quantity. This evidence suggests that even if symbolic and
non-symbolic number abilities depend upon distinct functional and neural
substrates, they can work in concert.

A two-systems account of belief processing is clearly compatible with a
variety of accounts of development, and of the mature theory of mind
system. At one extreme we might imagine that there is no direct
information flow between the early-developing and later-developing
systems (see e.g., Butterfill, 2007, for a discussion of this type of
information processing architecture). The early-developing system might
provide constraints for fast on-line social-cognitive processes such as
communication, and in development might serve to guide young children's
attention to cases in which their epistemic perspective diverges from
that of someone else . However, explicit judgements about what someone
else thought or knew (i.e., the later-developing system) would receive
no direct input from the early-developing system, so would have to infer
such content anew. At the other extreme the later-developing system may
depend on the other for its proper operation. Or, on analogy with the
case of number, it is possible that the two systems work in concert in
adults.

There is a surprising lack of evidence bearing directly upon these
questions. One intriguing exception is the existence of within-child
discrepancies on "implicit" versus "explicit" measures of false belief
understanding. As already mentioned, children as young as 24 months may
show looking behaviour that anticipates the action of a character with a
false belief (e.g., Southgate et al., 2007). However, there is evidence
that the very same children may respond incorrectly when asked to make
an explicit judgement about how the character will act (e.g., Clements &
Perner, 1994). These findings are clearly consistent with the
possibility that an early-developing system for tracking belief-like
states is guiding children's eye movements and a later-developing system
guides children's explicit judgements about beliefs. Moreover, Ruffman
et al. (2001) provide evidence that children may be highly confident in
their incorrect explicit prediction of the character's action (as
indexed by their "betting" of counters on a particular outcome) despite
correctly anticipating the character's action with their looking
behaviour. This finding is also consistent with the possibility that
there is no direct information flow between the early-developing and
late-developing systems.

Besides these findings our general line of argument leads us to think
that some possible relationships between the two systems are unlikely.
Our central claim is that early-developing and late-developing systems
for belief processing need to make different and complementary
trade-offs between flexibility and efficiency. If there is an efficient
system for ascribing belief-like states then the efficiency of this
system cannot come for free, so there will be restrictions on the kind
of input it can take and the kinds of belief-like states it can ascribe.
This contrasts starkly with a primary feature of late-developing belief
reasoning competence, which is the ability to use all cognitively
available facts to ascribe any belief that the subject can themselves
entertain. These considerations mean that the early- and late-developing
systems cannot be fully continuous with each other . The
early-developing system could not be an "implicit" homologue of the
late-developing system. Nor could it supply candidate belief contents to
the late-developing system for the significant proportion of cases that
were beyond its representational powers . Moreover, limits on the kind
of belief-like states that the early-developing system could represent
would mean that many beliefs that could be represented in the
late-developing system could never be mapped back into the
early-developing system. Of course, future work could prove incompatible
with these predictions. Our hope is that by spelling out the
implications of our account we help identify the pressure points that
might be particularly important for future investigation.

*Comparing the current account with existing theories.*

As noted in the introduction, we are not the first to propose that
theory of mind may involve more than one type of cognitive system.
However, our particular target is the paradigm case of reasoning about
beliefs and in this final section we make the case for the novelty of
our approach to this problem. We suggest that existing accounts either
resemble our account only in superficial ways, or do not give a
two-system account of processing beliefs, or else severely underspecify
what a two-system account is supposed to achieve or how the existence of
two systems might be studied in a systematic way.

*Superficial resemblance. *As mentioned in earlier sections, Leslie and
colleagues (e.g., Leslie, 1987, 1994a,b, 2000, 2005) have long advocated
the view that infants are innately endowed with a mechanism (the "theory
of mind module" or ToMM) that enables them to generate representations
of propositional attitudes, such as beliefs, from behavioural input.
Leslie (1994a) proposes that ToMM consists of two subsystems: Sub-system
1 is available from 6 to 8 months of age and is concerned with
processing goal-directed actions; sub-system 2 is available from
approximately 18 months of age and generates propositional attitude
representations. This view has recently been extended by Baillargeon and
colleagues (e.g., Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005; Song & Baillargeon, 2008;
Song et al., 2008) who, on the basis of the evidence from infants
reviewed earlier, propose that sub-system 1 is not only concerned with
goal-directed actions but also represents the agent's belief, provided
that belief is true. However, although these authors discuss two
sub-systems, any resemblance to our two-systems account is superficial
because the two sub-systems discussed by Leslie and Baillargeon are
sub-components of a single cognitively efficient theory of mind module.
The purpose of this module is to explain how infants can reason about
mental states like belief despite lacking either the time or the
cognitive resources that might be necessary for the relevant concepts to
be acquired. Neither sub-system identified by Leslie and Baillargeon
resembles our "System 2", which is cognitively flexible and demands
general processing resources. This research may therefore be seen as
contributing to the case we have made for a cognitively efficient theory
of mind system, but it does not directly bear on our hypothesis that
there is an additional, less efficient but more flexible system and it
does not offer any explanation of how belief reasoning can be both
efficient and flexible.

In addition to the two sub-systems of the theory of mind module, Leslie
and colleagues propose that the action of the theory of mind module is
augmented by an inhibitory "selection processor" (SP) that selects the
appropriate belief content from alternatives computed by ToMM (e.g.,
Leslie, 1994b; Leslie, German & Polizzi, 2004). The proposal is that SP
develops later than the subsystems of ToMM; immaturity of SP explains
why children fail standard false belief tasks until around 4 years of
age; and continuing need for SP explains the involvement of executive
function in** **adults' belief reasoning (e.g., German & Hehman, 2006).
The ToMM-SP account has been criticised on the grounds that, since SP
needs to "know" which belief content to select from the output of ToMM,
SP must itself be capable of belief reasoning, so rendering ToMM
redundant (Doherty, 1999). However, such outright objections matter less
for our current purposes than whether the ToMM-SP account can explain
how belief reasoning can be both cognitively efficient and flexible. On
the face of it the ToMM-SP account may appear to offer an explanation. A
single system, ToMM, supplies the representational basis for belief
reasoning in infants, 3- to 6-year-old children and adults. The addition
of SP makes belief reasoning more cognitively demanding by forcing the
involvement of inhibitory processes. Any appearance of an explanation
here is illusory, however, for two reasons. First, ToMM supplies
multiple alternative beliefs (this is why SP is needed). In general,
knowing only that someone has one of multiple alternative beliefs is not
sufficient for predicting their behaviour. The ToMM component of ToMM-SP
is therefore insufficient for belief reasoning and therefore is not an
alternative to the cognitively efficient systems for belief reasoning
that is proposed here. Second, on our analysis, merely representing
beliefs *as such* is cognitively demanding because beliefs are states
individuated by their propositional contents and normative implications.
It follows that cognitively efficient systems cannot represent beliefs
as such. This is why, on our account, cognitively efficient systems for
solving tasks involving beliefs represent belief-like states which serve
as proxies for beliefs; and this is also why there is a trade-off
between efficiency and flexibility. Leslie and colleagues' ToMM is
therefore not an alternative to the cognitively efficient systems for
belief reasoning we have proposed because there is no reason to suppose
that it could be cognitively efficient. Thus, although originally
motivated by concerns related to a subset of our own (see e.g., Leslie,
1994a), the ToMM-SP account does not address the critical concern for
the current paper, which is to explain how belief reasoning can be both
flexible and cognitively efficient.

*Two-systems, but not for belief reasoning.* On the basis of evidence
from neuro-developmental disorders, Tager-Flusberg and Sullivan (2000)
propose a two-systems account for "theory of mind" in the broadest
sense. However, their critical distinction is between processes for
"social cognition", which includes belief reasoning, and "social
perception", which include processing of faces and body postures for
social information, but do not include processing of any epistemic
states including belief-like states or beliefs. Clearly, the proposal we
have developed here is not in conflict with the general account of
Tager-Flusberg and Sullivan (2000), but neither is it implied by their
account.

Gergely and Csibra (2003) propose a different kind of account whereby
the ability of infants to process goal-directed actions is explained in
terms of reasoning about how a goal state might best be achieved given
the physical constraints of the situation. This account concerns
intentions, not beliefs, but resembles our own insofar as infants'
sensitivity to a propositional mental state is explained without
supposing that infants reason about mental states *as such*. Moreover,
the authors also suppose that infants eventually develop into children
and adults who do, in addition, reason about mental states as such.
However, there is a critical difference between this account and our
own. For this account explicitly denies that infants are ascribing
anything like mental content to the agents of the goal-directed action.
The authors conceive of a "mindblind" creature "... that -- although
unable to represent intentional mental states -- could nevertheless have
evolved a reality-based interpretational strategy to represent
goal-directed actions" (Gergely & Csibra, 2003, pp. 290; compare Gordon
2000). For reasons already discussed, we believe that the ability to
ascribe simple forms of mental content, at least in the form of
belief-like states, may be necessary to explain the full range of
phenomena demonstrated by cognitively efficient belief reasoning in
infants and adults.** **Thus, our account has substantial explanatory
power beyond the account of Gergely and Csibra (2003).

Recent work by cognitive neuroscientists has also shown evidence of
dissociable neural systems for action processing (e.g., Brass, Schmitt,
Spengler & Gergeley, 2008; Liepelt, Von Crammon & Brass, 2008). One
system is in the "mirror network", which regions of cortex, including
the inferior frontal gyrus, that show activity both when the subject
performs an action and when they observe action in others (e.g., Gallese
& Goldman, 2003; Rizzolati & Craighero, 2004). The other system is in
the "mentalizing network", which includes regions of medial prefrontal
cortex, superior temporal sulcus and temporal-parietal junction, that
shows activity when the subject reasons about the mental states of
others (e.g., Frith & Frith, 2003). Once again, however, the claims of
these authors pertain to the processing of actions. They do not make
claims about the processing of beliefs or belief-like states, and so
these accounts are distinct from the one developed here.

*Underspecified two-systems accounts. *It will be clear from earlier
sections that several authors have discussed some form of two-system
account where both systems are concerned with enabling the subject to be
sensitive to beliefs (e.g., Call & Tomasello, 2008; Doherty, 2006;
Gomez, 2007; O'Neil, 1996; Penn, Holyoak & Povinelli, 2008; Perner,
1991; . Such accounts are typically aimed at describing the abilities of
infants, children or non-human animals in a way that does not require
full understanding (or in some cases, any understanding) of knowledge or
beliefs as such. Our account clearly shares these aims, but it has
substantial additional motivation and scope and leads to distinctive
empirical predictions. In terms of motivation, we have aimed not merely
to describe the abilities of infants and non-human animals in a
distinctive way from the abilities of older children and adults, but to
explain how these abilities can be cognitively efficient such that they
are within the processing capabilities of infants and non-human animals.
In terms of scope, we have stressed that the need for cognitively
efficient processing of belief-like states is not confined to infants
and non-human animals (which is the scope of existing accounts) but is
also clearly present in human adults. We hypothesise that one way in
which this need is met in human adults is by employing a cognitively
efficient capacity for processing belief-like states that has been
present since infancy and may be shared with some non-human species. In
terms of empirical predictions, we expect that cognitively efficient
processing of belief-like states will come at the cost of distinctive
limits on the complexity of the belief-like states that can be
processed. On analogy with the case of number cognition, by identifying
such "signature limits" it should be possible to tell when a subject is
processing belief-like states rather than full-blown beliefs. And
testing for such signature limits offers a way of testing whether
similar systems for processing belief-like states are being used by
infants, human adults and non-human animals, even though it is often
necessary to test these different subject groups on quite different
kinds of task. In each of these respects our account is a substantial
advance on existing two-systems accounts.

### Conclusion

We began with an apparent contradiction: infants pass false belief tasks
yet children first understand false belief at around four years.
Accounting for such findings presents a major puzzle in theory of mind
research, but not the only one. It is also puzzling that chimpanzees
(and some other non-human species) show complex social behaviour but an
apparently contradictory pattern of success and failure on
perspective-taking tasks in the laboratory e.g., Call & Tomasello, 2005,
2008). And it is puzzling that human adults seem so quick and efficient
in their social interaction and communication - abilities that appear to
require theory of mind - yet most direct investigation suggests that
adults' belief reasoning is relatively effortful and dependent upon
limited cognitive resources for memory and executive control (e.g.,
Apperly, Samson & Humphreys, 2009). In the existing literature, debate
about these questions tends to be polarised: infants, non-human animals
and on-line social interaction either employ mental concepts such as
perception or belief, or get by exclusively with behavioural rules.  The
case of number cognition suggests an alternative view.

The key components of this view are as follows. Human infants and some
non-human animals are able to solve some theory of mind tasks by virtue
of having one or more systems that are cognitively efficient but limited
and inflexible. These limitations are only overcome years later when
human children acquire psychological concepts such as belief and desire;
this development occurs gradually , appears to be related to the
development of language and executive function , and may be facilitated
by explicit training . This equips children with a new system for theory
of mind reasoning that is highly flexible but cognitively inefficient.
In human adults, both systems exist in parallel. The cognitively
efficient system plays a central role in guiding on-line social
interaction and communication. The cognitively flexible system enables
adults to engage in top-down guidance of social interaction (such as
anticipating what the audience of a lecture might know, or working out
how one misjudged the audience afterwards), and in explicit reasoning
about the causes and justifications of mental states (as in everyday
practical reasoning, or jurisprudence).

Characterising the ability to ascribe beliefs forces us to confront deep
theoretical questions about how cognitive systems handle information
under different processing constraints. The answers to these questions
are of importance in all sub-disciplines in which theory of mind is
studied, including developmental, cognitive and comparative psychology,
and cognitive neuroscience. These questions are not unique to the domain
of theory of mind, and research on theory of mind can usefully inherit
some of the lessons from other domains - such as number cognition. One
lesson from other domains is that it is not always helpful to frame
questions in terms of whether or not children or non-human animals
possess a critical concept such as "number" or "belief". Unvariegated
notions of what it is to have a concept may be inadequate for
understanding the complex pattern of phenomena found in cases like
number and belief. A second, critical, lesson is that when faced with
the problem of operating in complex domains using finite cognitive
resources, two systems are often the solution.

### References

Apperly, I. A., Back, E., Samson, D., & France, L. (2008). The cost of
thinking about false beliefs: Evidence from adults' performance on a
non-inferential theory of mind task. *Cognition, 106*, 1093-1108.

Apperly, I.A., Riggs, K.J., Simpson, A., Chiavarino, C. & Samson, D.
(2006). Is belief reasoning automatic? *Psychological Science, 17(10)*
841-844.

Apperly, I.A., Samson, D., & Humphreys, G.W. (2005). Domain-specificity
and theory of mind: Evaluating evidence from neuropsychology. *Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 9(12),* 572-577.

Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., & Humphreys, G. W. (2009). Studies of adults
can inform account of theory of mind development. *Developmental
Psychology, 45(1)*, 190-201*.*

Apperly, I.A., & Robinson, E.J. (1998). Children's mental representation
of referential relations. *Cognition, 67,*287-309.

Apperly, I. A., & Robinson, E. J. (2003). When Can Children Handle
Referential Opacity? Evidence for a systematic variation in 5- and
6-year-old children\'s reasoning about belief and belief reports.
*Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 85*, 297-311.

Astington, J., & Baird, J. A. (Eds.). (2005). *Why Language Matters for
Theory of Mind*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Baldwin, D., Andersson, A., Saffran, J., & Meyer, M. (2008). Segmenting
dynamic human action via statistical structure. *Cognition, 106*(3),
1382-1407.

Baldwin, D., & Baird, J. A. (2001). Discerning intentions in dynamic
human action. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5*(4), 171-178.

Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A.M. & Frith (1985) Does the autistic child
have a \"theory of mind\"? Cognition, 21, 37-46.

Baron-Cohen, S., Tager-Flusberg, H. & Cohen, D.J. (2000) *Understanding
other minds. Perspectives from developmental cognitive neuroscience.
*2^nd^ Ed. Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Baroody, A. J. & Dowker, A. (2003) *The Development of Arithmetic
Concepts and Skills:Constructing Adaptive Expertise*. Erlbaum, Mahwah,
New Jersey.

Barth, H., Kanwisher, N. & Spelke, E.S. (2003). The construction of
large number representations in adults. *Cognition 86*, 201--221.

Behne, T., Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Unwilling
Versus Unable: Infants' Understanding of Intentional Action.
*Developmental Psychology, 41*(2), 328-337.

Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2005). One-year-olds
comprehend the communicative intentions behind gestures in a hiding
game. *Developmental Science, 8*(6), 492-499.

Ben-Yami, H. (1997). Against Characterizing Mental States as
Propositional Attitudes. *Philosophical Quarterly, 47*(186), 84-89.

Bennett, J. (1976). *Linguistic Behaviour*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Bernstein, D. M., Atance, C., Loftus, G. R., & Meltzoff, A. (2004). We
saw it all along - Visual hindsight bias in children and adults.
*Psychological Science, 15,* 264-267.

Birch, S. A. J. & Bloom, P. (2004). Understanding children\'s and
adults\' limitations in mental state reasoning. *Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8, *255-260.

Birch, S.A.J. & Bloom, P. (2007). The curse of knowledge in reasoning
about false beliefs. *Psychological Science, 18(5)*, 382-386.

Bloom, P., & Gelman, T. P. (2000). Two reasons to abandon the false
belief task as a test of theory of mind. *Cognition, 77*, B25-B31.

Boysen, S. T., & Berntson, G. G. (1989). Numerical competence in a
chimpanzee (*Pan troglodytes*). *Journal of Comparative Psychology,103,
*23--31.

Brandom, R. (1994). *Making It Explicit*. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Brannon, E.M. and Terrace, H.S. (1998) Ordering of the numerosities 1-9
by monkeys. *Science 282,* 746--749

Brass, M., Schmitt, R.M., Spengler, S. & Gergeley, G. (2008)
Investigating action understanding: Inferential processes versus action
simulation. *Current Biology, 17, *2117-2121.

Breheny, R., (2006) Communication and Folk Psychology, *Mind & Language.
21(1),* 74-107

Bugnyar, T., Stöwe, M., & Heinrich, B. (2007). The ontogeny of caching
in ravens, Corvus corax *Animal Behaviour, 74*(4), 757-767.

Bull, R., Philips, L.H. & Conway, C.A. (2008). The role of control
functions in mentalizing: Dual task studies of theory of mind and
executive function. *Cognition, 107(2),* 663-672.

Butterfill, S.A. (2007) What are modules and what is their role in
development? *Mind and Language 22:4,* 450-473*.*

Byrne, R. W. (2002). Parsing behaviour: A mundane origin for an
extraordinary ability? In Enfield, N.J. & Levinson, S. (Eds.) *Roots of
human sociality. Culture, cognition and interaction*. Berg, Oxford.

Byrne, R. W. (2003). Imitation as Behaviour Parsing. *Philosophical
Transactions: Biological Sciences, 358*(1431), 529-536.

Call, J. (2001). Chimpanzee social cognition. *Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5(9),* 388-393.

Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (2005). What chimpanzees know about seeing
revisited: An explanation of the third kind. In N. Eilan, C. Hoerl, T.
McCormack & J. Roessler (eds.). *Joint Attention:Communication and other
Minds* (pp. 45-64). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (2008). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of
mind? 30 years later. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(5),* 187-192.

Campbell, J. (1986). Conceptual Structure. In C. Travis (Ed.), *Meaning
and Interpretation* (pp. 127-158). Oxford: Blackwell.

Carey, S. (2002). The Origin of Concepts. In N. L. Stein, P. J. Bauer &
M. Rabinowitz (Eds.), *Representation, Memory and Development* (pp.
43-51). London: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Carey, S. (2002). The Origin of Concepts. In N. L. Stein, P. J. Bauer &
M. Rabinowitz (Eds.), *Representation, Memory and Development* (pp.
43-51). London: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Carey, S., & Xu, F. (2001). Infants\' Knowledge of Objects: Beyond
Object Files and Object Tracking. *Cognition, 80*, 179-213.

Carlson, S. M., Moses, L. J., & Hix, H. R. (1998). The role of
inhibitory processes in young children\'s difficulties with deception
and false belief. *Child Development, 69(3),* 672-691.

Carpendale, J. I., & Chandler, M. (1996). On the Distinction between
False Belief Understanding and Subscribing to an Interpretive Theory of
Mind. *Child Development, 67*, 1686-1706.

Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2002). A new false belief test
for 36-month-olds. *British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20*,
393-420.

Clayton, N. S., Dally, J. M., & Emery, N. J. (2007). Social cognition by
food-caching corvids. The western scrub-jay as a natural psychologist.
*Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 362*, 507-552.

Clayton, N. S., & Emery, N. J. (2007). The social life of corvids.
*Current Biology, 17*(16), R652-R656-R652-R656.

Clements, W.A., & Perner, J. (1994). Implicit understanding of belief.
*Cognitive Development, 9,* 377-397.

Clements, W., Rustin, C., & McCallum, S. (2000). Promoting the
transition from implicit to explicit understanding: a training study of
false belief. *Developmental Science, 3*(1), 81-92.

Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological and Referential Understanding of Action
in Infancy. *Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences,
358*(1431), 447-458.

Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (1998). The teleological origins of
mentalistic action explanations: A developmental hypothesis.
*Developmental Science, 1*(2), 255-259.

Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2007). Obsessed with goals\': Functions and
mechanisms of teleological interpretation of actions in humans. *Acta
Psychologica, 124*(1), 60-78.

Dally, J.M., Emery, N.J. & Clayton, N.S. (2006) Food-caching western
scrub-jays keep track of who was watching when. *Science, 312,*
1662-1665.

Davidson, D. (1980). Towards a Unified Theory of Meaning and Action.
*Grazer Philosophische Studien, 11*, 1-12.

Davidson, D. (1989). The Conditions of Thought. In J. Brandl & W.
Gombocz (Eds.), *The Mind of Donald Davidson*. Amsterdam: Rodopi.

Davidson, D. (1990a). Representation and Interpretation. In K. Mohyeldin
Said, W. Newton-Smith, R. Viale & K. Wilkes (Eds.), *Modelling the
Mind*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Davidson, D. (1990b). The Structure and Content of Truth. *The Journal
of Philosophy, 87*(6), 279-328.

Davidson, D. (1995). Could there be a science of rationality?
*International Journal of Philosophical Studies, 3*(1), 1-16.

Davidson, D. (1999). The Emergence of Thought. *Erkenntnis, 51*, 7-17.

Davidson, D. (2003). Responses to Barry Stroud, John McDowell, and Tyler
Burge. *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, LXVII*(3), 691-699.

Dehaene, S. (1997) *The number sense: How the mind creates mathematics.
*Oxford University Press.

Dehane, S., & Cohen. (1994). Dissociable Mechanisms of Subitizing and
Counting: Neuropsychological Evidence From Simulatagnosic Patients.
*Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
20*(5), 958-975.

Dienes, Z., & Perner, J. (1999) A theory of implicit and explicit
knowledge. *Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 22,* 735-755.

Doherty, M.J. (1999). Selecting the wrong processor: a critique of
Leslie\'s theory of mind mechanism-selection processor theory.
*Developmental Science, 2,* 81-85.

Doherty, M. J. (2006). The Development of Mentalistic Gaze
Understanding. *Infant and Child Development, 15*, 179-186.

Doherty, M.J. (2008). *: How Children Understand Others\' Thoughts and
Feelings.* Hove, UK: Psychology Press.

Dretske, F. (1988). *Explaining Behavior*. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Dretske, F. (1981). *Knowledge and the flow of information*. Oxford:
Blackwell.

Dunham, P. J., Dunham, F., & O\'Keefe, C. (2000). Two-year-old\'s
Sensitivity to a Parent\'s Knowledge State: Mind Reading or Contextual
Cues? *British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 18*, 519-532.

Emery, N. J., & Clayton, N. S. (2001). Effects of Experience and Social
Context on Prospective Caching Strategies by Scrub Jays. *Nature, 414*,
443-446.

Emery, N. J., & Clayton, N. S. (2007). How to Build a Scrub-Jay that
Reads Minds. In S. Itakura & K. Fujita (Eds.), *Origins of the Social
Mind: Evolutionary and Developmental Perspectives*. Tokyo: Springer.

Epley, N., Keysar, B., Van Boven, L., & Gilovich, T. (2004). Perspective
taking as egocentric anchoring and adjustment. *Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 87,* 327-339*.*

Evans, J. St. B. T. (2003) In two minds: dual-process accounts of
reasoning. Trends in *Cognitive Sciences, 7(10),* 454-459.

Fias, W. & Verguts, T. (2004) The mental number line: exact and
approximate. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(10)*, 447-448.

Feigenson, L. & Carey, S. (2003) Tracking individuals via object-files:
Evidence from infants' manual search. * Developmental Science, 6,
*568-584.

Feigenson, L., Dehane, S. & Spelke, E.S. (2004) Core systems of number.
*Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(7,)* 307-314.

Fodor, J. (1975). *The Language of Thought*. Crowell: New York.

Fodor, J. (1983). *The Modularity of Mind: an Essay on Faculty
Psychology*. Cambridge, Mass ; London: MIT Press.

Fodor, J. (1992). A theory of the child\'s theory of mind. *Cognition,
44*(3), 283-296.

Frith, U., & Frith, C.D. (2003). Development and neurophysiology of
mentalising. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
*Series B, Biological Sciences*, 358, 459-473.

Gallese, V. & Goldman, A. (2003) Mirror neurons and the simulation
theory of mind-reading. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2,* 493-501.

Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (1992). Preverbal and verbal counting and
computation. *Cognition, 44,* 43--74.

Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (2000). Non-verbal numerical cognition:
from reals to integers. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4,* 59--65.

Gelman, R., & Gallistel, C. R. (1978). *The child's understanding of
number.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Garnham, W.A., & Perner, J. (2001) Actions really do speak louder than
words -- but only implicitly: Young children's understanding of false
belief in action. *British Journal of Experimental Psychology, 19(3)*,
413-432.

Garnham, W.A., & Ruffman, T. (2001) Doesn't see, doesn't know: is
anticipatory looking really related to understanding of belief?
*Developmental Science, 4(1), 94-100.*

Gergely, G., Nadasky, Z., Csibra, G., & Biro, S. (1995). Taking the
Intentional Stance at 12 Months of Age. *Cognition, 56*, 165-193.

German, T.P. & Hehman, J.A. (2006) Representational and executive
selection resources in "theory of mind": Evidence from compromised
belief-desire reasoning in old age. *Cognition, 101,* 129-152.

Gilbert, D. T. (1998). Ordinary personology. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T.,
Fiske, & G. Lindzey, (Eds.) *The handbook of social psychology* (4th
edition). New York: McGraw Hill.

Gomez, J.-C. (2007). Pointing Behaviors in Apes and Human Infants: A
Balanced Interpretation. *Child Development, 78*(3), 729-734.

Gómez, R., & Gerken, L. (2000). Infant artificial language learning and
language acquisition. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4*(5), 178-186.

Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1997). *Words, Thoughts, and Theories*.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Gordon, R. (2000). Sellars\'s Ryleans Revisited. *Protosociology, 14*,
102-114.

Grice, P. (1989). *Studies in the way of words*. Cambridge, Mass ;
London: Harvard University Press.

Halberda, J. & Feigenson, L. (2008) Developmental change in the acuity
of the "Number sense": The approximate number system in 3-, 4-, 5- and
6-year-olds and adults. *Developmental Psychology, 44(5),* 1457-1465.

Happé, F., & Loth, E. (2002). 'Theory of Mind' and Tracking Speakers'
Intentions. *Mind and Language, 17*(1-2), 24-36.

Hare, B., Call, J., Agnetta, B., & Tomasello, M., (2000). Chimpanzees
know what conspecifics do and do not see. *Animal Behaviour, 59,*
771-785.

Hare, B., Call, J., & Tomasello, M., (2001). Do chimpanzees know what
conspecifics know and do not know? *Animal Behaviour, 61,* 139-151.

Hare, B., Call, J., Tomasello, M. (2006). Chimpanzees deceive a human
competitor by hiding. *Cognition, 101(3),* 495-514.

Harris, P. (1994). Thinking by Children and Scientists. In L. Hirschfeld
& S. Gelman (Eds.), *Mapping the Mind: domain specificity in cognition
and culture*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Harris, P., Johnson, C. N., Hutton, D., Andrews, G., & Cooke, T. (1989).
Young

children\'s theory of mind and emotion. *Cognition and Emotion, 3,*
379-400.

Hauser, M.D. and Carey, S. (2003) Spontaneous representations of small
numbers of objects by rhesusmacaques: examinations of content and
format. *Cognitive Psychology 47,* 367--401.

Heal, J. (1998). Co-Cognition and Off-Line Simulation: Two Ways of
Understanding the Simulation Approach. *Mind and Language, 13*(4),
477-498.

Hulme, S., Mitchell, P. & Wood, D. (2003). Six-year-olds' difficulties
handling intentional contexts. *Cognition, 87,* 73-99.

Jusczyk, P. (1995). Language Acquisition: Speech Sounds and the
Beginning of Phonology. In J. Miller, L. & P. D. Eimas (Eds.), *Speech,
Language and Communication*. San Diego: Academic Press.

Keysar, B., Lin, S.H., & Barr, D.J. (2003). Limits on theory of mind use
in adults. *Cognition, 98(1). *25-41.

Koenig, M., Clément, F., & Harris, P. (2004). Trust in Testimony:
Children\'s Use of True and False Statements. *Psychological Science,
15*(10), 694-698.

Kovacs, A.M. & Mehler, J. (2007) Enhanced executive functions boost
performance in theory of mind tasks: the case of bilinguals. Paper
presented to the Society for Research in Child Development, Boston, MA.
March 29 - April 1.

Laurence, S., & Margolis, E. (2005). Number and Natural Language. In P.
Carruthers, S. Laurence & S. Stich (Eds.), *The Innate Mind* (pp.
272-288). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Le Corre, M. & Carey, S. (2008) One, two, there, four, nothing more: An
investigation of the conceptual sources of the verbal counting
principles. *Cognition, 105,* 395-438.

LeFevre, J.-A., Bisanz, J. and Mrkonjic, L., 1988. Cognitive arithmetic:
Evidence for obligatory activation of arithmetic facts. *Memory and
Cognition 16,* 45--53.

Lemer, C., Dehaene, S., Spelke, E. & Cohen L. (2003) Approximate
quantities and exact number words: dissociable systems .
*Neuropsychologia 41 (14),* 1942-1958

Leslie, A. M. (1987). Pretense and representation: The origins of
"theory of mind". *Psychological Review, 94,* 412--426.

Leslie, A. (1994a). ToMM, ToBY, and Agency: Core Architecture and Domain
Specificity. In L. Hirschfeld & S. Gelman (Eds.), *Mapping the Mind:
domain specificity in cognition and culture*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Leslie, A.M. (1994b). Pretending and believing: Issues in the theory of
ToMM. *Cognition, 50,* 211--238.

Leslie, A.M. (2000). \"Theory of Mind\" as a Mechanism of Selective
Attention. In M. Gazzaniga (Ed.), *The New Cognitive Neurosciences*.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

Leslie, A.M. (2005). Developmental Parallels in Understanding Minds and
Bodies. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9*(10), 459-462.

Leslie, A.M., German, T. P., & Polizzi, P. (2004). Belief-desire
reasoning as a process of selection. *Cognitive Psychology, 50*, 45-85.

Leslie, A.M., German, T. P., & Polizzi, P. (2005). Belief-desire
reasoning as a process of selection. *Cognitive Psychology, 50*, 45-85.

Leslie, A.M., & Polizzi, P. (1998). Inhibitory processing in the false
belief task: Two conjectures. *Developmental Science, 1*(2), 247-253.

Leslie, A.M., Xu, F., Tremoulet, P. D., & Scholl, B. J. (1998). Indexing
and the Object Concept: Developing \'What\' and \'Where\' Systems.
*Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2(1)* 10-18*.*

Liberman, A. M., & Mattingly, I. G. (1985). The Motor Theory of Speech
Perception Revised. *Cognition, 21*(1), 1-36.

Liberman, A. M., & Whalen, D. H. (2000). On the Relation of Speech to
Language. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4*(5), 187-196.

Liepelt, R., Von Crammon, D.Y. & Brass, M. (2008). How do we infer
others' goals from non-sterotypic actions? The outcome of
context-sensitive inferential processing in right inferior parietal and
posterior temporal cortex. *Neuroimage, 43,* 784-792.

Lillard, A.S. (1998-a). Ethnopsychologies: Cultural variations in theory
of mind. *Psychological Bulletin, 123,* 3-30.

Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., Striano, T., & Tomasello, M. (2006).
Twelve- and 18-month-olds point to provide information for others.
*Journal of Cognition and Development, 7, 173-187.*

Luo, Y. & Baillargeon, R. (2007) Do 12.5-month-old infants consider what
objects others can see when interpreting their actions? *Cognition,
105,* 489-512.

McDowell, J. H. (1996). *Mind and world : with a new introduction*.
Cambridge, Mass ; London: Harvard University Press.

McGarrigle, J. & Donaldson, M. (1975). Conservation accidents cognition
3(4), 341-350 .

McKinnon, M.C. & Moscovitch, M. (2007) Domain-general contributions to
social reasoning: Theory of mind and deontic reasoning re-explored.
*Cognition, 102(2), 179-218.*

Millikan, R. (1984). *Language, Thought and Other Biological
Categories*. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Millikan, R. (1993). *White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for
Alice*. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Mitchell, P., Robinson, E.J., Isaacs, J.E. & Nye, R.M.
(1996).Contamination in reasoning about false belief: An instance of
realist bias in adults but not children. *Cognition, 59, 1-21.*

Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Level 1 perspective-taking at 24
months of age. *British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 24,*
603-613.

Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2007). How 14- and 18-Month-Olds Know What
Others Have Experienced. *Developmental Psychology. 43(2),* 309-317.

Newton, A. M., & de Villiers, J. G. (2007). Thinking While Talking:
Adults Fail Nonverbal False-Belief Reasoning. *Psychological Science,
18*(7), 574-579.

Newton P., Reddy V., Bull R. (2000). Children's everyday deception and
performance on false-belief tasks. *British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, Volume 18 (2)*, pp. 297-317.

O\'Neill, D. K. (1996). Two-year-old Children\'s Sensitivity to a
Parent\'s Knowledge State When Making Requests. *Child Development, 67*,
659-677.

O'Neill, D K. & Chong, C. F. (2001). Preschool children's difficulty
understanding the types of information obtained through the five senses.
*Child Development, 72*, 3, 803-815.

Oakes, L. M., & Cohen, L. B. (1990). Infant Perception of a Causal
Event. *Cognitive Development, 5*(2), 193-207.

Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-Month-Old Infants
Understand False Beliefs? *Science, 308*(8), 255-258.

Papineau, D. (1993). *Philosophical Naturalism*. Oxford: Blackwell.

Peacocke, C. (1992). *A Study of Concepts*. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Pellicano, E. (2007). Links Between Theory of Mind and Executive
Function in Young Children With Autism: Clues to Developmental Primacy.
*Developmental Psychology, 43*(4), 974-990.

Penn, D. C., Holyoak, K.J. & Povinelli, D. J. (2008). Darwin's mistake:
Explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds.
*Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31,* 109-178.

Penn, D. C., & Povinelli, D. J. (2007). On the lack of evidence that
non-human animals possess anything remotely resembling a 'theory of
mind\'. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 362*(1480),
731--744.

Pepperberg, I.M. (2006) Grey parrot (*Psittacus erithacus*) numerical
abilities: addition and further experiments on a zero-like concept.
*Journal of Comparative Psychology 120(1), *1-11.

Perner, J. (1991). *The Representational Mind*. Brighton: Harvester.

Perner, J. (1998). The meta-intentional nature of executive functions
and theory of mind. In P. Carruthers & J. Boucher (Eds.), *Language and
Thought: Interdisciplinary themes*. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Perner, J., Baker, S. & Hutton, D. (1994). Prelief: The conceptual
origins of belief and pretence. In Lewis, C. & Mitchell, P. (Eds.)
Children's early understanding of mind: Origins and development. Hove.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Perner, J. (1998). The meta-intentional nature of executive functions
and theory of mind. In P. Carruthers & J. Boucher (Eds.), *Language and
Thought: Interdisciplinary themes*. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Perner, J. (In press). Who took the cog out of cognitive science?
Mentalism in an era of anti-cognitivism. In P.A. Frensch et al., (Eds),
*International Congress of Psychology -- 2008 Proceedings.* Psychology
Press.

Perner, J., & Lang, B. (1999). Development of theory of mind and
executive control. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3*(9), 337-344.

Perner, J., & Lang, B. (2002). What Causes 3-year-olds' Difficulty on
the Dimensional Change Card Sorting Task? *Infant and Child Development,
11*, 93-105.

Perner, J., & Ruffman, T. (2005). Infant\'s Insight into the Mind: How
Deep? *Science, 308*, 214-216.

Piaget, J. & Szeminska, A. (1952) *The child\'s conception of number.*
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Pietroski, P. (1992). Intentionality and Teleological Error. *Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly, 73*, 267-282.

Polak, A. & Harris, P.L. (1999). Deception by young children following
non-compliance. *Developmental Psychology, 35(2), *561-568.

Povinelli, D. J. (2001). On the Possibility of Detecting Intentions
Prior to Understanding Tem. In B. F. Malle, L. Moses & D. A. Baldwin
(Eds.), *Intentions and Intentionality* (pp. 225-248). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Povinelli, D. J., Bering, J., & Giambrone, S. (2000). Toward a Science
of Other Minds: Escaping the Argument by Analogy. *Cognitive Science,
24*(3), 509-541.

Povinelli DJ, Eddy TJ (1996) What young chimpanzees know about seeing.
*Monographs of the Society for Research in Child* *Development, 61* (2,
Serial No. 247)

Povinelli, D.J. & Giambrone, S. (1999). Inferring other minds: Failure
of the argument by analogy. *Philosophical Topics, 27,* 167-201.

Povinelli, D.J. & Vonk, J. (2003) Chimpanzee minds: suspiciously human?
*Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(4),* 157-160.

Price, C. (2001). *Functions in Mind*. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Reddy, V. & Morris, P. (2004). Participants don\'t need theories -
Knowing minds in engagement. *Theory and Psychology,14 (5),* 647-665.

Rizzolati, G. & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron system. *Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 27,* 169-192.

Robinson, E. (1994). What People Say, What They Think, and What is
Really the Case: Children\'s Understanding of Utterances as Sources of
Knowledge. In C. Lewis & P. Mitchell (Eds.), *Children\'s Early
Understanding of Mind: origins and development*. Hove: Erlbaum.

Robinson, E., & Apperly, I. A. (2001). Children's difficulties with
partial representations in ambiguous messages and referentially opaque
contexts. *Cognitive Development, 16*, 595-615.

Ross-Sheehy, S., Oakes, L., & Luck, S. J. (2003). The development of
visual short-term memory capacity in infants. *Child Development,
74(6)*, 1807--1822.

Ruffman, T., Garnham, W., Import, A., & Connolly, D. (2001). Does Eye
Gaze Indicate Knowledge of False Belief: Charting Transitions in
Knowledge. *Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 80,* 201-224.

Ruffman, T. & Keenan, T.R. (1996) The belief-based emotion of surprise:
the case for a lag in understanding relative to false belief.
*Developmental Psychology, 9*, 89-102.

Ruffman, T., & Perner, J. (2005). Do infants really understand false
belief? *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9*(10), 462-463.

Russell, J. (2007). Controlling core knowledge: conditions for the
ascription of intentional states to self and others by children.
*Synthese, DOI 10.1007/s11229-007-9203-8*.

Sabbagh, M. (2006). Executive Functioning and Preschoolers\'
Understanding of False Beliefs, False Photographs, and False Signs.
*Child Development, 77*(4), 1034-1049.

Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996). Statistical
Learning by 8-Month-Old Infants. *Science, 274*(5294), 1926-1928.

Samson, D., Apperly, I.A., Braithwaite, J. & Andrews, B. (Under
submission). Seeing it your way: Evidence for altercentric intrusion
effects in visual perspective taking.

Saxe, R., & Carey, S. (2006). The Perception of Causality in Infancy.
*Acta Psychologica, 123*, 144-165.

Saxe, R., Carey, S., & Kanwisher, N. (2004). Understanding other minds:
Linking developmental psychology and functional neuroimaging. *Annual
Review of Psychology, 55,* 87-124.

Saxe, R., Schultz, L.E. & Jiang, Y.V. (2006) Reading minds versus
following rules: Dissociating theory of mind and executive control in
the brain. *Social Neuroscience 1(3-4), *284-298.

Saylor, M. M., Baldwin, D. A., Baird, J. A., & LaBounty, J. (2007).
Infants\' On-line Segmentation of Dynamic Human Action. *Journal of
Cognition and Development, 8*(1), 113-113.

Scholl, B. J., & Leslie, A. (1999). Explaining the Infant\'s Object
Concept: Beyond the Perception/Cognition Dichotomy. In E. LePore & Z.
Pylyshyn (Eds.), *What Is Cognitive Science?* (pp. 26-73). Oxford:
Blackwell.

Slaughter, V., & Gopnik, A. (1996). Conceptual Coherence in the Child\'s
Theory of Mind: Training Children to Understand Belief. *Child
Development, 67*, 2967-2988.

Sodian, B., Thoermer, C. & Metz, U. (2007) Now I see it but you don't:
14-month-olds can represent another person's visual perspective.
*Developmental Science 10(2),* 199-204.

Song, H. & Baillargeon, R. (2008). Infants' reasoning about others'
false perceptions. *Developmental Psycholology, 44(6),* 1789-1795.

Song, H., Onishi, K. H., Baillargeon, R., & Fisher, C. (2008). Can an
actor's false belief be corrected by an appropriate communication?
Psychological reasoning in 18.5-month-old infants. *Cognition, 109,*
295-315.

Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007). Action Anticipation
through Attribution of False Belief By Two-Year-Olds. *Psychological
Science, 18, *587-592.

Spelke, E. (1994). Initial Knowledge: Six Suggestions. *Cognition,
50*(1-3), 431-445.

Spelke, E. (2000). Core Knowledge. *American Psychologist, 55*,
1233-1243.

Spelke, E., & Kinzler, K. D. (2007). Core Knowledge. *Developmental
Science, 10*(1), 89-96.

Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986/95). *Relevance : communication and
cognition* (2nd ed ed.). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (2002). Pragmatics, Modularity & Mindreading.
*Mind and Language, *17, 3-23.

Sprung, M., Perner, J., & Mitchell, P. (2007). Opacity and Embedded
Perspectives: object identity and object properties. *Mind and Language,
22*(3), 215-245.

Starkey, P. & Cooper, R.G. Jr. (1980). Perception of numbers by human
infants. *Science, 210*, 1033-1035.

Stout, R. (1996). *Things That Happen Because They Should*. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Surian, L., Caldi, S., & Sperber, D. (2007). Attribution of Beliefs by
13-Month-Old Infants. *Psychological Science, 18*(7), 580-586.

Suddendorf, T., & Whiten, A. (2003). Reinterpreting the Mentality of
Apes. In J. Fitness & K. Sterelny (Eds.), *From Mating to Mentality:
Evaluating Evolutionary Psychology* (pp. 173-196): Psychology Press.

Tager-Flusberg, H. & Sullivan, K. (2000). A componential view of theory
of mind: evidence from Williams syndrome. *Cognition, 76,* 59-89.

Taylor, C. (1964). *The Explanation of Behaviour*. London: Routledge.

Tomasello, M., Call, J. and Hare, B. (2003) Chimpanzees understand
psychological states -- the question is which ones and to what extent.
*Trends in Cognitive Sciences, Volume 7(4),* 153-156.

Trick, L. and Pylyshyn, Z.W. (1994) Why are small and large numbers
enumerated differently? A limited capacity preattentive stage in
vision.* Psychological Review, 101*, 80--102.

Vogel, E. K., Woodman, G. F., & Luck, S. J. (2001). Storage of features,
conjunctions, and objects in visual working memory. *Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 27,* 92--114.

Wang, J., Apperly, I.A., Samson, D. & Braithwaite, J.J. (Under
submission). Adults infer belief-like states automatically.

Wellman, Henry (1990). *The Child's Theory of Mind.* Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.

Wellman, H., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of Theory of
Mind Development: The Truth about False-Belief. *Child Development,
72*(3), 655-684.

Whiten, A. (1994). Grades of mindreading. In C. Lewis & P. Mitchell
(Eds.), *Children\'s Early Understanding of Mind* (pp. 47--70). Hove:
Erlbaum.

Whiten, A. (1996). When does smart behaviour-reading become
mind-reading? In P. Carruthers & P. K. Smith (Eds.), *Theories of
Theories of Mind* (pp. 277--292). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation
and constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children\'s
understanding of deception. *Cognition, 13*, 103-128.

Wimmer, H., & Gschaider, A. (2000). Children's understanding of belief:
Why is it important to understand what happened? In P. Mitchel & K. J.
Riggs (Eds.) *Children's reasoning and the mind,* (pp. 253-266). Hove.
East Sussex: Psychology Press.

Woodward, A. (1998). Infants Selectively Encode the Goal Object of an
Actor\'s Reach. *Cognition, 69*, 1-34.

Wynn, K. (1992) Addition and subtraction by human infants. *Nature, 358,
*749-750.

Wynn, K. (1996) Infants' individuation and enumeration of sequential
actions. *Psychological Science, 7,* 164-169.

Xu, F. (2003). Numerosity Discrimination in Infants: Evidence for Two
Systems of Representations. *Cognition, 89*, B15-B25.

Xu, F., Carey, S., & Quint, N. (2004). The emergence of kind-based
object individuation in infancy. *Cognitive Psychology, 49*, 155-190.

Xu, F. & Spelke, E.S. (2000). Large number discrimination in 6-month old
infants. *Cognition, 74,* B1-B11.

Zelazo, P., Jacques, S., Burack, J. A., & Frye, D. (2002). The Relation
between Theory of Mind and Rule Use: Evidence from Persons with
Autism-Spectrum Disorders. *Infant and Child Development, 11*, 171-195.

### Footnotes

1\. Some of these authors discuss more than two systems, and we agree
that it is plausible that more than one system for fast, efficient
theory of mind processing may exist. However, for clarity, here and
throughout we will refer to the "two systems" view.

2\. For readers not familiar with standard false belief tasks, in one
typical false belief task a story character, Sally, places her marble in
a basket, then goes outside to play. In her absence, a second character,
Anne, moves the marble from the basket to a box, with the result that
Sally has a false belief about the marble's location. Children are then
asked test questions that require them to infer Sally's false belief in
order to say where Sally thinks the marble is located, or to predict
where Sally will first look to find her marble (Baron-Cohen, Leslie &
Frith, 1985).

3\. There is also modest evidence that 2- and 3-year-old children use
information about false belief in performing various intentional
activities.  For instance, Carpenter and colleagues provide evidence
that children take into account false beliefs in learning new words ;
and there is also a range of evidence on deception-related behaviours
(Polak and Harris 1999; Newton, Reddy and Bull, 2000; Reddy and Morris
2004).  It is possible that these findings should be interpreted in the
light of a range of tasks in which children of this age intelligently
exploit facts about which objects individuals are acquainted with
in their interpretations of requests (Moll and Tomasello 2007), their
own communicative gestures (Liszkowski, Carpenter, et al. 2006) and
their use of testimony .  It is an open question how this evidence from
intentional activities relates to the evidence from non-intentional eye
movements and looking times.

4\. Although the aforementioned studies all show precocious
understanding of false beliefs at very different ages, we shall assume
that this variation reflects differences in the sensitivity of the
methods employed rather than differences in cognitive processes that are
being tested.

5\. Somewhat flexible abilities have been demonstrated both in
chimpanzees (e.g., Boysen & Berntson, 1989) and in an African grey
parrot (e.g., Pepperberg, 2006) that have received substantial training
in the symbolic representation of numerical quantity.

6\. For example, 5- and 6-year-old children (who are old enough to pass
false belief tasks) still have problems understanding how beliefs are
acquired how beliefs interact with desires and the emotional
consequences of false beliefs (e.g., Harris, Johnson, Hutton, Andrews &
Cooke, 1989; Ruffman & Keenan, 1996).

7\. We are grateful to Josef Perner for suggesting this possibility to
us.

9\. Understanding registration as explained here appears also to enable
one to pass standard false belief tasks involving unexpected location
transfers . Since children can indeed pass such tasks if their gaze
rather than verbal responses are taken to be the relevant measure , this
is not an objection to our view but a genuine puzzle. One possibility is
that an early-developing system for tracking registrations is guiding
children's eye movements whereas a later-developing system guides
children's explicit judgements about beliefs (see section on "How could
the two systems be related?").

10\. This study examined children, rather than adults, in order to have
participants who were able to count (so could comprehend symbolic number
stimuli) but had no training in formal arithmetic (so were unable to
answer the estimation problems using symbolic arithmetic operations).
Although it would be consistent with this study\'s findings to hold that
symbolic numbers are mapped to non-symbolic representations only by
children, it seems more likely that adults are also able to map symbolic
to non-symbolic number representations.
